Belgian HOWTO

Dag Wieërs

<dag@wieers.com>

v1.1.8g, 16 February 2003


 This document describes how to configure Linux for Belgian users and lists
Linux user groups, businesses and other resources in Belgium.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table of Contents
1. Introduction
    1.1. Why this document?
    1.2. New versions of this document
    1.3. Translated versions
    1.4. Contributions
    1.5. The Linux.be-domain debacle
    1.6. Feedback
    1.7. Copyright information
    1.8. Todo
   
   
2. Configuration
    2.1. Keyboard setup
    2.2. Display and applications
    2.3. Time zone
    2.4. Locale support
    2.5. Native language support and codepages
    2.6. Ispell
    2.7. Setting up Internet
   
   
3. Belgian ISP information
    3.1. PPP/ISDN
    3.2. Cable
    3.3. ADSL
   
   
4. Belgian Linux organisations
    4.1. ALUG (Antwerp)
    4.2. BeLUGa (Brussels)
    4.3. BxLUG (Brussels)
    4.4. Charleroi LUG (Charleroi)
    4.5. Computer Forum KaHo (Leuven)
    4.6. HCC Limburg (Genk)
    4.7. HCC Leuven (Leuven)
    4.8. IGUANA (Brussels)
    4.9. Infogroep - IGWE (Brussels)
    4.10. ISW (Leuven)
    4.11. Leuven Linux Users (Leuven)
    4.12. LiLiT (Liège)
    4.13. Linux for Life (Berchem)
    4.14. Louvain-Li-nux (Louvain-La-Neuve)
    4.15. LugWV (Brugge)
    4.16. LUMUMBA (Diepenbeek)
    4.17. Mons LUG (Mons)
    4.18. Namur LUG (Namur)
    4.19. Open Technology Assembly (Brussels)
    4.20. OS3B (Charleroi)
    4.21. Ouverture
    4.22. PC Aktief Computerclub (Sint-Niklaas)
    4.23. Student Information Networking (Geel)
    4.24. TINA (Antwerp)
    4.25. ULYSSIS (Leuven)
    4.26. WOLF (Mechelen)
    4.27. Zeus WPI (Gent)
   
   
5. Belgian Linux businesses
    5.1. aDOC Services
    5.2. Ampersant
    5.3. Arafox
    5.4. Aragne
    5.5. Better Access nv
    5.6. Consultux
    5.7. CoreSequence Consultancy & Training
    5.8. CSS nv
    5.9. D. Connect
    5.10. Digibel
    5.11. Dolmen
    5.12. DS Improve bvba
    5.13. EMMO Service
    5.14. FKS bvba
    5.15. Glasshouse Business Networks bvba
    5.16. Grmbl productions
    5.17. Hellea sprl
    5.18. IBM Belgium sa/nv
    5.19. IP Net generation
    5.20. Kangaroot Linux Solutions
    5.21. Linugen
    5.22. LinuxIdee
    5.23. Mind
    5.24. Minotaur Solutions
    5.25. Neolabs
    5.26. OpenSides
    5.27. Phidani Software sprl
    5.28. Qbian Linux Systems
    5.29. Si-Lab
    5.30. Spier bvba
    5.31. Stone-IT Belgium
    5.32. Supporting Open Source cvba
    5.33. Sygmanet
    5.34. Théridion sprlfs
    5.35. UWYN
    5.36. VirgoPlus sprl
   
   
6. Belgian Linux resources
    6.1. Websites
    6.2. HOWTO
    6.3. HOWTO translations
    6.4. FTP
    6.5. Usenet/Newsgroups
    6.6. IRC
   
   

1. Introduction

1.1. Why this document?

 Since there was no information anywhere on the net for Belgian Linux users
around 1998, we started to collect stuff that we thought could be important.
This HOWTO aims to be the definitive list of all Belgian-related Linux
information. If you think not, you have no excuse to complain and certainly
not to not contribute. ;)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.2. New versions of this document

 If you need to know more about the Linux Documentation Project or about
Linux HOWTO's, feel free to contact the supervisor Tim Bynum <
linux-howto@sunsite.unc.edu>.

 Tim Bynum will post the listing to several national and international
newsgroups on a monthly basis. In addition, the Belgian HOWTO can be found on
the World Wide Web at [http://dag.wieers.com/howto/] http://dag.wieers.com/
howto/. New versions of the Belgian HOWTO are always placed at this site
first, so please be sure to check if the copy you are reading is still up to
date!
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.3. Translated versions

 This document is currently translated in 3 languages (English, Dutch and
French), we're trying to keep all three of them in sync, but the English
version is the source-document!

 The English and Dutch version are maintained by Dag Wieërs <dag@wieers.com>
and is found at: [http://dag.wieers.com/howto/] http://dag.wieers.com/howto/.

 The French version is maintained by Dany Vanderroost <danyv@euronet.be> and
is found at: [http://club.euronet.be/dany.vanderroost/howto.html] http://
club.euronet.be/dany.vanderroost/howto.html.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.4. Contributions

 A few people mailed us their suggestions and improvements, thanks go to:

  * Wim Vandeputte <wvdputte@reptile.rug.ac.be>
   
  * Pablo Saratxaga <srtxg@ping.be>
   
  * Christophe Lambin <clambin@skynet.be>
   
  * Geert Uytterhoeven <geert@linux-m68k.org>
   
  * Herman Bruyninckx <Herman.Bruyninckx@mech.kuleuven.ac.be>
   

 Many thanks go to Ivo Clarysse <soggie@iguana.be> who started something
similar earlier (LinBel) and his project helped us a lot to get this document
online.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.5. The Linux.be-domain debacle

 As you might have heard, Belgium also has its problem with the Linux.be
domain. Similar to the Linux.nl case. Around March 1999, someone tricked the
DNS administration about the trademark 'Linux' in Belgium by using 'Linux' as
a commercial representation of the company ('uithangbord') which was
according to the rules of the DNS administration at that time. The company in
fact was one that sold motor-parts and the registration was done with a fake
fax containing a penguin.

 It is sad that the person who registered the Linux.be-domain name, did this
behind the back of some Open Source volunteers who were planning to register
a not-for-profit organisation to hold the domain name to prevent any abuse.

 Afterwards there were several meetings with this person to work out an
agreement so that the domain was not used for commercial purposes and handed
over to a neutral organisation. But after several attempts it was very clear
that the owner wanted full control over the domain, which he later emphasized
by 'handing it over' to his own not-for-profit organisation. He stated
several times he wanted to keep the right to add advertissements to the
website, but wouldn't mind that volunteers added content to the site (that
was empty at the time). After this, no one was willing to work voluntarily
for the content of the site. Sadly he managed to get some people volunteer
for it after all.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.6. Feedback

 If some information seems to be wrong, deceptive or missing, we'd appreciate
if you mailed us the improvements. Since we're just human this document isn't
bug-free, but your contribution can and will make a difference.

 To add yourself to the Linux user groups or businesses, collect all
necessary information and mail it to us.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.7. Copyright information

 This document, Belgian HOWTO, is copyrighted (c) 1998 - 2002 by Dag Wieërs.
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under
the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 published by the
Free Software Foundation; with the Invariant Sections being "New versions of
this document", "Contributions", "Feedback" and "Copyright information" with
no Front-Cover Texts and with no Back-Cover Texts.

 A copy of the license is available at [http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html]
http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html.

 Trademarks are owned by their owners.

 Although the information given in this document is believed to be correct,
the author will accept no liability for the content of this document. Use the
tips and examples given herein at your own risk.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.8. Todo

 There are some things I'm planning to add to this document, if you're
interested be sure you're reading the most current version of this document.
(This todo-list is only a reminder to myself, it is not in the translated
documents!)

  *   Add more information about ADSL
   
  *  Update the locale-section, preferably link to a related document.
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. Configuration

2.1. Keyboard setup

 Linux provides 2 ways to set up your keyboard. At the console you can use 
loadkeys and under XFree86 you can use xmodmap.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.1. Console

 To use the keytable for a Belgian keyboard you can use loadkeys be2-latin1
or loadkeys be-latin1. The only difference between the two is that be2-latin1
adds support for twosuperior and threesuperior (keycode 41) and grave
(keycode 43).

 Usually loadkeys is started at boottime from the scripts located somewhere
in /etc/rc.d. Different distributions handle it differently. Most
distributions have a simple program (like kbdconfig in Red Hat, 
install-keymap in Debian or yast in SuSE) to change the behaviour of these
scripts.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.2. XFree86

 To set your keyboard properly under XFree86 you've got more choices. By
running Xconfigurator (or a similar program) a config-file for XFree86 is
created (with some standard behaviour). This file is called XF86Config-4 or
XF86Config and is usually located in /etc/X11 or /etc

 Make sure (and change otherwise) that something similar to this is given
under the Keyboard Section.
        Section "Keyboard"                                                   
                Protocol        "Standard"                                   
                XkbRules        "xfree86"                                    
                XkbModel        "pc101"                                      
                XkbLayout       "be"                                         
        EndSection                                                           

 If you own a 'microsoft' keyboard (or the less-known penguin keyboards ;p)
you can enable those extra 3 keys by changing the "pc101" into "pc104". (I
use the extra keys as meta-keys in my windowmanager so some shortcuts don't
conflict with the internal ones of my wm).

 To get the AltGr key to work under XFree86 simply add in the Keyboard
Section:
        RightAlt        ModeShift                                            
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.3. Compose key

 Some people prefer to use a 'Compose'-key to enter their special characters,
like:
        Compose-' e    =>    é                                               
        Compose-/ o    =>    ø                                               
        Compose-c ,    =>    ç                                               
        Compose-c o    =>    ©                                               
        Compose-s s    =>    ß                                               
For XFree86, the solution is to enter xmodmap -e "keycode xx = Multi_key" or 
xmodmap -e "keysym yy = Multi_key" where 'xx' is the keycode or 'yy' the
keysym of the key you choose to be the 'Compose'-key. (use xev to get these
values)

 Alternatively you can add keycode xx = Multi_key to your ~/.xmodmaprc. This
way it happens automagically.

 For the console, you could do something similar with loadkeys. echo "altgr
keycode 52 = Compose" | loadkeys to use AltGr-/ as a 'Compose'-key.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2. Display and applications

 Some applications have to be compiled as 8-bit clean to work well with the
European characterset. Others like to be told in advance.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.1. Using the ISO-8859-1 font in console

 You can load the ISO-8859-1 font by typing the following in console:
        setfont lat1u-16.psf                                                 
        mapscrn trivial                                                      
        echo -ne '\033(K'                                                    

 To be able to use ë, è, é or ç in console, you might want to add these to
your ~/.inputrc:
        set meta-flag on                                                     
        set convert-meta off                                                 
        set output-meta on                                                   
(This must be done for every user, if you want this to be default for all
users you can either add this file to /etc/skel/ or you could add these lines
to /etc/inputrc and add the following to /etc/bashrc, export INPUTRC=/etc/
inputrc)

Note Note!                                                                   
     This is only useful to programs that use readline (like bash)           

 Also set the following environment variables:
        LC_CTYPE=iso-8859-1                                                  
        SYSFONT=lat1u-16.psf                                                 
        SYSTERM=linux                                                        
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2. Support for the Euro symbol

 Since Europe had to invent a new character, the Euro, there's a new
standard. It's called ISO-8859-15 (aka Latin-9 or Latin-0). To add support
you need both a new font and new keymaps. This is part of every major
distribution nowadays, if you have an older distributions you probably need a
newer console-tools package.

 There's more information in the [http://www.tldp.org/HOWTO/mini/
Euro-Char-Support/] Euro Character Support mini HOWTO
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3. Time zone

 Since Belgium is located in the Central European Time zone (aka MET) which
(in the winter) is equivalent to the Greenwhich Mean Time plus 1 (GMT+1), you
can simply link /usr/lib/zoneinfo/localtime/MET to /etc/localtime symbolicly
like:   ln -sf /usr/lib/zoneinfo/MET /etc/localtime or   ln -sf /usr/lib/
zoneinfo/Europe/Brussels /etc/localtime This automagically sets Daylight
Savings (which is GMT+2 in the summer).

Note Note!                                                                   
     Different distributions have different paths, zoneinfo can be located in
     /usr/share or such...                                                   

Note Another note!                                                           
     Red Hat uses a tool called timeconfig, SuSE uses yast                   

 To change the CMOS clock and then synchronize the system time with the CMOS
clock, do something like this:
        hwclock --set --date="Feb 25 03:38"                                  
        clock -u -s                                                          
If your clock is set to local time (which is discouraged but if you also run
broken OS's, you must), you can do:
        hwclock --set --date="Feb 25 04:38"                                  
        clock -s                                                             
[Noticed the 1 hour difference ? ;p]

 If your computer has Internet-access you can use NTP (Network Time Protocol)
to keep your system clock in sync. One way of doing this is by starting
ntpdate from cron by adding
        05 0 * * * root /usr/sbin/ntpdate -s ntp.belnet.be > /dev/null 2>&1  
to your /etc/crontab. Check the ISP-information below to see if your ISP has
a NTP-server available.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4. Locale support

 Not much programs support locale yet, if you want to know more about locale
or how to write your own programs to support it, check: [put the damn url
here ;p]

 Be aware that locale makes it harder to resolve problems as less people can
help you !! You might understand a problem when it's in technical English,
but what if it's translated in some obscure Dutch ?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4.1. Dutch

 To enable support for the Dutch locale in Belgium on a system with locale
support you just have to set the following environment variables:
        LANG=nl                                                              
        LANGUAGE=nl_BE                                                       
Try nl_BE.ISO_8859-1 if nl_BE does not work.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4.2. French

 If you want French locale support in Belgium, set the following environment
variabels:
        LANG=fr                                                              
        LANGUAGE=fr_BE                                                       
Try fr_BE.ISO_8859-1 if fr_BE does not work.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4.3. German

 If you want instead German locale support in Belgium, set the following
environment variabels:
        LANG=de                                                              
        LANGUAGE=de_BE                                                       
Try de_BE.ISO_8859-1 if de_BE does not work.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4.4. Walloon

 For Walloon locale support you can find files and information at: [http://
chanae.stben.be/linux/locales/walon/] http://chanae.stben.be/linux/locales/
walon/. To use it set:
        LANG=wa                                                              
        LANGUAGE=wa_BE:fr_BE                                                 
Try wa_BE.ISO_8859-1 if wa_BE does not work.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5. Native language support and codepages

 These options add support for the Belgian characterset and codepages. If
you'd like to have these, compile a kernel with these options put on. They
only apply to some filesystems (FAT-based, ISO9660, ...).
        < > Codepage 850 (Europe)                                            
        < > NLS ISO 8859-1  (Latin 1; Western European Languages)            
        < > NLS ISO 8859-15 (Latin 9; Western European Languages with Euro)  
Located in Filesystems > Native Language Support

 If your kernel is a modular kernel that came with your distribution (=you
never compiled a kernel before), then you might want to type:
        insmod nls_cp850                                                     
        insmod nls_iso8859_1                                                 
        insmod nls_iso8859_15                                                
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6. Ispell

    Contributed by Dany Vanderroost <danyv@euronet.be>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6.1. Install and setup

 Ispell is composed of different components: the main software and one or
more dictionaries. The default dictionary is /usr/lib/ispell/english.hash. To
override this default you have 2 options. Either you can set the
DICTIONARY-variable or launch it with the "-d" option.

 You can create custom dictionaries in your home-directory like ~
/.ispell_english.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6.2. Dutch

 
        export DICTIONARY=nederlands                                         
or
        ispell -d nederlands file_name                                       
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6.3. French

 
        export DICTIONARY=francais                                           
or
        ispell -d francais file_name                                         
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6.4. German

 
        export DICTIONARY=deutsch                                            
or
        ispell -d deutsch file_name                                          
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6.5. Walloon

 
        export DICTIONARY=walon                                              
or
        ispell -d walon file_name                                            
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6.6. Multilanguage spelling

 By default Ispell will not work with multiple dictionaries but the solution
is to work with the ~/.ispell_words file.

 If you don't want to make multi instance with Ispell, You can build ~
/.ispell_words with the words package by cp /usr/dict/words ~/.ispell_words;
chmod +w ~/.ispell_words.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7. Setting up Internet

2.7.1. Dialing in with your modem (PPP)

 To configure PPP correctly, you should check the [http://www.linuxports.com/
howto/ppp/] PPP-HOWTO. I try to explain it briefly, but if you have any
questions or problems, read the HOWTO very carefully.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.1.1. Configuring the modem

 To configure your modem, you can alter the initstring of your modem. To
learn more about your modem, check [http://www.spy.net/~dustin/modem/] Ask
Mr. Modem.

Warning If you have a winmodem you will probably not get it to work. More    
        information about winmodems is at: [http://linmodems.org/] http://   
        linmodems.org/. Work is underway, but winmodems are not as good as   
        real modems.                                                         
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.1.2. Installing pppd

 Now, you need to have the ppp-package installed (check this by typing pppd
--version), make sure you have a recent one. Then you have to make sure
you've got these files:

 /usr/local/bin/ppp
        #!/bin/sh                                                                                                
                                                                                                                 
        case $1 in                                                                                               
                (on|start)                                                                                       
                        TELEPHONE='555-1212'        # The telephone number for the connection                    
                        ACCOUNT='your_login'        # The account name for logon (as in 'George Burns')          
                                PASSWORD='your_pass'        # The password for this account (and 'Gracie Allen') 
                        INITSTRING='AT&F&C1&D2Z'# Modem initstring                                               
                        IPLOCAL=0.0.0.0             # Local IP address if known. Dynamic = 0.0.0.0               
                        IPREMOTE=0.0.0.0            # Remote IP address if desired. Normally 0.0.0.0             
                        DEVICE=/dev/ttyS1           # Serial Device com1=ttyS0, com2=ttyS1,...                   
                        SPEED=57600                 # 19200, 38400 or 57600 (don't try something different)      
                        export TELEPHONE ACCOUNT PASSWORD INITSTRING                                             
                        exec /usr/sbin/pppd $DEVICE $SPEED $IPLOCAL:$IPREMOTE \                                  
                        user $ACCOUNT connect /etc/ppp/ppp-on-dialer                                             
                        ;;                                                                                       
                (off|stop)                                                                                       
                        if [ -r /var/run/ppp0.pid ]; then                                                        
                                kill -INT `cat /var/run/ppp0.pid`                                                
                                if [ ! "$?" = "0" ]; then                                                        
                                        rm -f /var/run/ppp0.pid                                                  
                                        echo "ERROR: Removed stale pid file"                                     
                                        exit 1                                                                   
                                fi                                                                               
                                exit 0                                                                           
                        fi                                                                                       
                        echo "ERROR: PPP link is not active on ppp0"                                             
                        exit 1                                                                                   
                        ;;                                                                                       
                (info|status)                                                                                    
                        /usr/sbin/pppstats                                                                       
                        ;;                                                                                       
                (*)                                                                                              
                        echo "Usage: ppp on|off|info|start|stop|status";                                         
        esac                                                                                                     

  /etc/ppp/ppp-on-dialer
        #!/bin/sh                                                            
                                                                             
        exec /usr/sbin/chat -v                                        \      
                REPORT CONNECTION                                     \      
                REPORT CARRIER                                        \      
                TIMEOUT              10                               \      
                ABORT                '\nBUSY\r'                       \      
                ABORT                '\nNO ANSWER\r'                  \      
                ABORT                '\nNO CARRIER\r'                 \      
                ABORT                '\nNO DIALTONE\r'                \      
                ABORT                '\nRINGING\r\n\r\nRINGING\r'     \      
                ABORT                'Invalid Login'                  \      
                ABORT                'Login incorrect'                \      
                ''                   "\r$INITSTRING\r"                \      
                'OK-+++\c-OK'        'ATH0'                           \      
                TIMEOUT              45                               \      
                OK                   "ATDT$TELEPHONE"                 \      
                CONNECT              '\d\c'                           \      
                ogin:--ogin:         "$ACCOUNT"                       \      
                ord:                 "$PASSWORD"                             
You can remove the -v once everything looks normal.

 The pppd command uses /etc/ppp/options to list its options, change these
options to whatever fits. These defaults normally work in most cases.
        asyncmap 20a0000                                                     
        crtscts                                                              
        debug                                                                
        default-mru                                                          
        defaultroute                                                         
        detach                                                               
        escape 11,13,ff                                                      
        hide-password                                                        
        ipcp-accept-local                                                    
        ipcp-accept-remote                                                   
        lcp-echo-failure 4                                                   
        lcp-echo-interval 400                                                
        lock                                                                 
        modem                                                                
        mtu 1500                                                             
        netmask 255.255.255.0                                                
        noipdefault                                                          
        passive                                                              
                                                                             
        #idle 300                                                            
        #kdebug 0                                                            
        #-vj                                                                 
Once dialing in works like a charm, you can leave debug out.

Warning It is important to emphasize that every special character, thus every
        character that is not [a-ZA-Z0-9] and '_', should be escaped by      
        preceding it with a '\'-character. Thus "e!b$l+" would become "e\!b\ 
        $l\+". Try it if you are having troubles !                           
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.1.3. pap-secrets / chap-secrets

 If your ISP requires CHAP or PAP, you need one of these files with their
proper username and password:

 /etc/ppp/pap-secrets or /etc/ppp/chap-secrets
        #client         server  secret          IP                           
        your_login      *       your_pass       *                            
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.1.4. Network

 To configure your nameservers, change /etc/resolv.conf. If dialing in is
succesful, but you can't get it to connect to URL's: this is probably the
cause.
        domain domain_of_your_isp                                            
        nameserver your_primary_nameserver                                   
        nameserver your_secondary_nameserver                                 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.1.5. File permissions

 Before you can run a (shell)script, it must be set executable. Be sure that
you set the permissions so that other users cannot see the passwords stored
in the files. If you want other users to be able to dial in, you might want
to consider using sudo. You might want to do the following:
        chmod u+rw og-rwx -R /etc/ppp                                        
        chmod u+x /etc/ppp/ppp-on-dialer /usr/local/bin/ppp                  
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.1.6. Dial + Hangup

 Then if /usr/local/bin is in your PATH, you can easily dial in with ppp on,
hangup with ppp off and to get some statistics, you do: ppp status.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.2. Dialing in with your ISDN-modem

    Contributed by Christophe Lambin <clambin@skynet.be>

 This section does not aim to be a definitive guide on ISDN for Linux. For a
more detailed discussion on the topic, see [http://www.wurtel.demon.nl/] Paul
Slootman's ISDN4Linux HOWTO and [http://www.isdn4linux.de/faq/]
ISDN4Linux-FAQ.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.2.1. Updating the kernel

 If you're using a 2.2 kernel, it's recommended to get an updated version of
the ISDN code. You can retrieve it from CVS at [ftp://ftp.suse.com/pub/
isdn4linux/] ftp://ftp.suse.com/pub/isdn4linux/. For more information, check:
[http://www.brisse.dk/site/linux/docs/isdn.htm] http://www.brisse.dk/site/
linux/docs/isdn.htm

Warning If you've recently purchased an Eicon Diva 2.0 PCI (eg, via          
        Belgacom), there's a good chance you've actually got a Diva 2.01.In  
        this case, you must get a version dated 1 July 1999 or later !       

 Once the ISDN is in place, you can start up the driver. Eg: modprobe hisax
type=11 protocol=2 Refer to the Readme's for the right parameters and values
for your card.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.2.2. ISDN4Linux toolkit

 Next, you'll need the ISDN4Linux toolkit. You can retrieve the latest
version of the toolkit at: [ftp://ftp.suse.com/pub/isdn4linux/] ftp://
ftp.suse.com/pub/isdn4linux/
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.2.3. Configuring the interface

 With the tools installed and configured, write a script to configure the
interface, to be used for the ISDN connection. As always in Linux, there's no
one correct way of doing this. I've put these in a script

 /etc/rc.d/rc.isdn:
        #!/bin/sh                                                            
                                                                             
        MSNREMOTE='555-1212'    # Phone number of ISP                        
        MSNLOCAL='555-1313'     # my number, without 0, with areacode        
        ACCOUNT='george'        # The account for logon (as 'George Burns')  
        IPLOCAL=10.0.0.2        # my fixed IP (use 10.0.0.2 if no fixed)     
        IPREMOTE=0.0.0.0        # IP number of ISP                           
        INTERFACE=ippp0                                                      
        /sbin/modprobe hisax type=11 protocol=2                              
        /sbin/isdnctrl verbose 3 system on                                   
        /sbin/isdnctrl addif $IF                                             
        /sbin/isdnctrl secure $IF on                                         
        /sbin/isdnctrl addphone $IF out $MSNREMOTE                           
        /sbin/isdnctrl eaz $IF $MSNLOCAL                                     
        /sbin/isdnctrl huptimeout $IF 300                                    
        /sbin/isdnctrl l2_prot $IF hdlc                                      
        /sbin/isdnctrl l3_prot $IF trans                                     
        /sbin/isdnctrl encap $IF syncppp                                     
        /sbin/isdnctrl dialmode $IF auto                                     
        /sbin/ifconfig $IF $IPLOCAL pointopoint $IPREMOTE -arp -broadcast    
        /sbin/ipppd /dev/ippp0 user $ACCOUNT $IPLOCAL:$IPREMOTE              

 To start this at boot time, make it executable and append the following to /
etc/rc.d/rc.local:
        if [ -x /etc/rc.d/rc.isdn ]; then                                    
                . /etc/rc.d/rc.isdn                                          
        fi                                                                   

 The ipppd command gets its parameters passed through a file, /etc/ppp/
ioptions:
        -ac                                                                  
        -bsdcomp                                                             
        debug                                                                
        defaultroute                                                         
        ipcp-accept-local                                                    
        ipcp-accept-remote                                                   
        mru 1524                                                             
        mtu 1500                                                             
        noipdefault                                                          
        -pc                                                                  
        useifip                                                              
        -vj                                                                  
        -vjccomp                                                             
                                                                             
        #idle 360                                                            
        #persistent                                                          

Warning Do NOT specify +pap or +chap in this file. This specifies the        
        authentication that ipppd should use for an INCOMING client. If you  
        were to use this to connect to your ISP, ipppd would wait for the ISP
        to authenticate itself using the specified protocol.                 

Warning It is important to emphasize that every special character, thus every
        character that is not [a-ZA-Z0-9] and '_' should be escaped by       
        preceding it with a '\'-character. Thus 'e!b$l+' would become 'e\!b\ 
        $l\+'. Try it if you are having troubles !                           

 Finally, create /etc/ppp/ip-down.local to handle the shutdown of the
interface:
        #!/bin/sh                                                            
                                                                             
        /sbin/ifconfig $1 down                                               
        sleep 1                                                              
        /sbin/ifconfig $1 10.0.0.2 pointopoint                               

Note Note!                                                                   
     This is to handle some problems with routes on shutdowns. Anyone know of
     a clean(er) solution ?                                                  
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.2.4. pap-secrets / chap-secrets

 If your ISP uses PAP or CHAP, create a file /etc/ppp/pap-secrets or /etc/ppp
/chap-secrets. Its format is:
        #client         server  secret          IP                           
        your_login      *       your_pass       *                            
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.2.5. Network

 Not really related to ISDN, but a lot of people forget this step (too eager
to try out all the stuff they typed in above ? :-)).

 Anyway, you need to configure the DNS, by creating a file /etc/resolv.conf:
        domain your_domain_of_your_isp                                       
        nameserver your_primary_nameserver                                   
        nameserver your_secondary_nameserver                                 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.2.6. File permissions

 Before you can run a (shell)script, it must be set executable. Be sure that
you set the permissions so that other users cannot see the passwords stored
in the files. If you want other users to be able to dial in, you might want
to consider using sudo. You might want to do the following:
        chmod u+rw og-rwx -r /etc/ppp                                          
        chmod u+x /etc/rc.d/rc.isdn /etc/ppp/ip.down-local /usr/local/bin/isdn 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.2.7. Dial + Hangup

 Finally, you can write a little wrapper to start and stop the ISDN
connection. I've put this as /usr/local/bin/isdn:
        #!/bin/bash                                                          
                                                                             
        case $1 in                                                           
                (on|start)                                                   
                        /sbin/isdnctrl dial ippp0                            
                        ;;                                                   
                (off|stop)                                                   
                        /sbin/isdnctrl hangup ippp0                          
                        ;;                                                   
                (info|status)                                                
                        /sbin/isdnctrl list ippp0                            
                        ;;                                                   
                (*)                                                          
                        echo "Usage: isdn on|off|info|start|stop|status"     
        esac                                                                 

 Then if /usr/local/bin is in your PATH, you can easily dial in with isdn on
and hangup with isdn off.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. Belgian ISP information

3.1. PPP/ISDN

3.1.1. Brutélé

Web
    [http://www.brutele.be/] http://www.brutele.be/
   
Support
    no official Linux support yet
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.1.2. Cable&Wireless (Online, TijdNet)

Authentication
    text-based / PAP
   
Extra options
    noccp
   
Nameservers
    62.112.0.7, 194.88.127.7
   
NTP-server
    ntp.antw.online.be, ntp.brus.online.be, ntp.gent.online.be
   
Web
    [http://www.online.be/] http://www.online.be/
   
Support
    no official Linux support yet
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.1.3. KPN Belgium (Eunet)

Authentication
    text-based
   
Extra options
    proxyarp
   
Nameservers
    193.74.208.135, 193.74.208.65, 193.121.171.135
   
Web
    [http://www.eunet.be/] http://www.eunet.be/
   
Support
    [http://support.eunet.be/] http://support.eunet.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.1.4. Planet Internet (Ping)

Authentication
    CHAP
   
Nameservers
    194.119.232.3, 194.119.232.2
   
NTP-server
    ntp.pi.be
   
Web
    [http://www.planetinternet.be/] http://www.planetinternet.be/
   
Support
    [http://www.ping.be/Support/redhat.shtml] http://www.ping.be/Support/
    redhat.shtml (Ping)
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.1.5. Skynet (Belgacom)

Authentication
    PAP
   
Extra options
    defaultroute
   
Nameservers
    195.238.2.21, 195.238.2.22
   
NTP-server
    ntp.skynet.be
   
Web
    [http://www.skynet.be/] http://www.skynet.be/
   
Support
    [http://help.skynet.be/linux/indexen.html] http://help.skynet.be/linux/
    indexen.html
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.1.6. Tiscalinet (Freegates, FreeBel)

Authentication
    text-based ?
   
Nameservers
    212.35.2.1, 212.35.2.2
   
NTP-server
    ntp.tiscalinet.be
   
Web
    [http://www.tiscalinet.be/] http://www.tiscalinet.be/
   
Support
    no official Linux support yet
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.1.7. UUNet (VT4)

Authentication
    PAP
   
Nameservers
    194.7.1.4, 194.7.15.70
   
Web
    [http://www.uunet.be/] http://www.uunet.be/, [http://www.vt4.net/] http:/
    /www.vt4.net/
   
Support
    no official support yet
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.1.8. Wanadoo (Euronet)

Authentication
    text-based / PAP
   
Nameservers
    195.74.193.12, 194.134.0.12
   
Web
    [http://www.wanadoo.be/] http://www.wanadoo.be/
   
Support
    no official Linux support yet
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.1.9. World Online

Authentication
    CHAP
   
Nameservers
    212.233.1.34, 212.233.2.34
   
Web
    [http://www.worldonline.be/] http://www.worldonline.be/
   
Support
    [http://help.worldonline.be/en/linux/index.htm] http://
    help.worldonline.be/en/linux/index.htm
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.1.10. XS4ALL

Authentication
    PAP
   
Nameservers
    194.109.6.66, 194.109.9.99
   
NTP-server
    ntp.xs4all.be
   
Web
    [http://www.xs4all.be/] http://www.xs4all.be/
   
Support
    [http://helpdesk.xs4all.be/ned/linux/index.html] http://
    helpdesk.xs4all.be/ned/linux/index.html
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.1.11. Yucom (DMA)

Authentication
    CHAP
   
Nameservers
    212.8.180.122, 212.8.180.126
   
NTP-server
    ntp.yucom.be
   
Web
    [http://www.yucom.be/] http://www.yucom.be/
   
Support
    no official Linux support yet
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.2. Cable

 DHCP was designed to make life easier, and most of the times it does ;) More
information to set up your DHCP client can be found at: [http://www.oswg.org/
oswg-nightly/DHCP.html] http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/DHCP.html and a
[http://www.dhcp-handbook.com/dhcp_faq.html]  list of Frequently Asked
Questions from the infamous document of John Wobus at [http://www.dhcp.org/]
http://www.dhcp.org/ which describes everything you need to know. Along with
the information in the Cable-Modem HOWTO ([http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/
Cable-Modem.html] http://www.oswg.org/oswg-nightly/Cable-Modem.html).

 Lots of people want to connect a whole network to their cablemodem, that's
not a problem. You'll need [http://www.tldp.org/HOWTO/
IP-Masquerade-HOWTO.html] IP-Masquerading and make sure the interface (that
speaks to the cablemodem) has the right MAC-address !! Another solution (in
case of problems) is to reset your cablemodem.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.1. Telenet (Pandora)

Automatic proxy
    http://pac.telenet.be:8080
   
HTTP proxy
    export http_proxy="http://proxy.telenet.be:8080/"
   
NTP-server
    ntp.telenet.be
   
Web
    [http://www.telenet.be/] http://www.telenet.be/
   
Support
    no official support yet
   
More information
    [http://helpdesk.telenet.be/] http://helpdesk.telenet.be/
   
    [http://users.pandora.be/bdr/DHCP/] http://users.pandora.be/bdr/DHCP/
   
    [http://users.pandora.be/de.boeve/pandora.html] http://users.pandora.be/
    de.boeve/pandora.html
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.2.2. UPC Belgium (Chello, TVD)

NTP-server
    time.chello.be
   
Web
    [http://www.upcbelgium.be/] http://www.upcbelgium.be/
   
Support
    no official support yet
   
More information
    [http://foobar.starlab.net/~soggie/tvd_linux/] http://foobar.starlab.net/
    ~soggie/tvd_linux/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.3. ADSL

3.3.1. Easynet

Web
    [http://www.easynet.be/] http://www.easynet.be/
   
Support
    [http://support.easynet.be/] http://support.easynet.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.3.2. KPN Belgium (Eunet)

Web
    [http://www.eudsl.be/] http://www.eudsl.be/
   
Support
    [http://support.eunet.be/] http://support.eunet.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.3.3. Turboline (Belgacom)

Web
    [http://www.turboline.be/] http://www.turboline.be/
   
Support
    no official support yet
   
More information
    [http://minf.vub.ac.be/~fquestie/turbo/] http://minf.vub.ac.be/~fquestie/
    turbo/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4. Belgian Linux organisations

 More information can be found in the [http://www.tldp.org/HOWTO/
User-Group-HOWTO.html] User Group HOWTO A complete list of Linux User Groups
is at: [http://www.ssc.com/linux/glue/] http://www.ssc.com/linux/glue/ and
at: [http://lugww.counter.li.org/] http://lugww.counter.li.org/
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.1. ALUG (Antwerp)

Address
   
    Van Luppenstraat 70
    B-2018 Antwerp
   
Phone
    +32 (0)3 218 63 54
   
Email
    <alug@pandora.be>
   
Web
    [http://sunsite.belnet.be/alug/] http://sunsite.belnet.be/alug/
   
Meetings
    In [http://sunsite.belnet.be/alug/road-description.html] ACCB (HVR),
    Herentalsebaan 212 te Deurne
   
Contact
    Armand Verachtert <alug@pandora.be>
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.2. BeLUGa (Brussels)

Address
   
              Building F, room 218
              Vrije Universiteit Brussel
    Pleinlaan 2
    B-1050 Brussel
   
Email
    <info@linux.rave.org>
   
Web
    [http://linux.rave.org/] http://linux.rave.org/
   
Mailinglist
    [http://linux.rave.org/mlist.html] http://linux.rave.org/mlist.html
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.3. BxLUG (Brussels)

Address
   
    Avenue Alexandre Galopin, 2
    B-1040 Brussels
   
Email
    <information@bxlug.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.bxlug.be/] http://www.bxlug.be/
   
Contact
    Jérôme Warnier <information@bxlug.be>
   
Mailinglist
    [http://www.bxlug.be/mailman/listinfo] http://www.bxlug.be/mailman/
    listinfo
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.4. Charleroi LUG (Charleroi)

Email
    <lug_charleroi@caramail.com>
   
Web
    [http://charleroi.linuxbe.org/] http://charleroi.linuxbe.org/
   
Mailinglist
    [http://charleroi.linuxbe.org/mailing/mail.html] http://
    charleroi.linuxbe.org/mailing/mail.html
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.5. Computer Forum KaHo (Leuven)

Email
    <cfk@kahosl.be>
   
Web
    [http://eduserv.kahosl.be/cfk/] http://eduserv.kahosl.be/cfk/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.6. HCC Limburg (Genk)

Email
    <hcc-limburg@iname.com>
   
Web
    [http://www.limburg.hccnet.nl/] http://www.limburg.hccnet.nl/
   
Contact
    Stijn Croes <stijncroes@hotmail.com>
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.7. HCC Leuven (Leuven)

Address
   
    Diegemstraat 61
    B-1930 Zaventem
   
Email
    <Michel.Cuppens@village.uunet.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.leuven.hccnet.nl/linux.html] http://www.leuven.hccnet.nl/
    linux.html
   
Contact
    Ivo Jossart <cartoonlover@pi.be> or Michel Cuppens <
    Michel.Cuppens@village.uunet.be>
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.8. IGUANA (Brussels)

Address
   
    Milcampslaan 101
    B-1040 Schaarbeek
   
Phone
    +32 (0)2 582 66 50
   
Fax
    +32 (0)2 582 66 50
   
Email
    <info@iguana.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.iguana.be/] http://www.iguana.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.9. Infogroep - IGWE (Brussels)

Address
   
              5F218 (building F)
    Pleinlaan 2
    B-1050 Brussels
   
Phone
    +32 (0)2 629 33 56
   
Fax
    +32 (0)2 629 33 89
   
Email
    <ig@igwe.vub.ac.be>
   
Web
    [http://igwe.vub.ac.be/] http://igwe.vub.ac.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.10. ISW (Leuven)

Address
   
    KHLeuven departement Rega
    Lokaal 004
    St-Maartenstraat 55d
    B-3000 Leuven,
   
Email
    <isw@student.khleuven.be>
   
Web
    [http://isw.student.khleuven.be/] http://isw.student.khleuven.be/
   
Extra
    Exclusive to KHLeuven students
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.11. Leuven Linux Users (Leuven)

Email
    <info@l2u.iguana.be>
   
Web
    [http://l2u.iguana.be/] http://l2u.iguana.be/
   
Meetings
    First and third thursday every month in [http://l2u.iguana.be/where.php]
    Freinetschool De Zevensprong, Vital Decosterstraat 67, B-3000 Leuven
   
Mailinglist
    [http://l2u.iguana.be/mailman/listinfo/members] http://l2u.iguana.be/
    mailman/listinfo/members
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.12. LiLiT (Liège)

Email
    <f.berger@student.ulg.ac.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.lilit.be/] http://www.lilit.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.13. Linux for Life (Berchem)

Email
    <fvos@vosberg.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.vosberg.be/lug/] http://www.vosberg.be/lug/
   
Mailinglist
    [http://www.vosberg.be/lug/mailinglist.shtml] http://www.vosberg.be/lug/
    mailinglist.shtml
   
Contact
    Frederik Vos <fvos@vosberg.be>
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.14. Louvain-Li-nux (Louvain-La-Neuve)

Address
   
              Louvain-la-neuve Linux User Group
    Place des paniers 5/014
    B-1348 Louvain-La-neuve
   
Phone
    +32 (0)10 454 761
   
Email
    <lln@udev.org>
   
Web
    [http://lln.udev.org/] http://lln.udev.org/
   
Contact
    Benjamin Henrion <benjamin.henrion@linuxbe.org>
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.15. LugWV (Brugge)

Email
    <info@lugwv.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.lugwv.be/] http://www.lugwv.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.16. LUMUMBA (Diepenbeek)

Address
   
              Filii Lamberti
    Universiteitslaan 1
    B-3590 Diepenbeek
   
Email
    <helpdesk@lumumba.luc.ac.be>
   
Web
    [http://lumumba.luc.ac.be/] http://lumumba.luc.ac.be/
   
Mailinglist
    <minordomo@lumumba.luc.ac.be>
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.17. Mons LUG (Mons)

Email
    <stephane.wirtel@belgacom.net>
   
Web
    [http://mons.linuxbe.org/] http://mons.linuxbe.org/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.18. Namur LUG (Namur)

Email
    <info@namurlug.org>
   
Web
    [http://namurlug.org/] http://namurlug.org/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.19. Open Technology Assembly (Brussels)

Address
   
    Kruipstraat 14
    B-1850 Grimbergen
   
Phone
    +32 (0)11 275 898
   
Fax
    +32 (0)11 270 389
   
Email
    <info@ota.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.ota.be/] http://www.ota.be/
   
Contact
    Jan Vanhercke <jan.vanhercke@c-cure.be>
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.20. OS3B (Charleroi)

Address
   
    29, Boulevard Audent
    B-6000 Charleroi
   
Email
    <info@os3b.org>
   
Web
    [http://www.os3b.org/] http://www.os3b.org/
   
Meetings
    Every thursday evening and saturday afternoon.
   
Mailinglist
    [http://carolo.net/mailman/listinfo/os3b] http://carolo.net/mailman/
    listinfo/os3b
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.21. Ouverture

Email
    <info@ouverture.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.ouverture.be/] http://www.ouverture.be/
   
Mailinglist
    [http://www.linuxcompanies.be/archive/] http://www.linuxcompanies.be/
    archive/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.22. PC Aktief Computerclub (Sint-Niklaas)

Address
   
              PC Aktief Computerclub
   
Web
    [http://www.pcaktief.be/] http://www.pcaktief.be/
   
Meetings
    Second tuesday every month in 'Ons Huis', Schoolstraat 270, B-9100
    Sint-Niklaas
   
Contact
    Johan De Baere <webmaster@pcaktief.be>
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.23. Student Information Networking (Geel)

Address
   
    Kleinhoefstraat 4
    B-2440 Geel
   
Email
    <sin@sin.khk.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.sin.khk.be/] http://www.sin.khk.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.24. TINA (Antwerp)

Contact
    Tina gebruikers <vraagtina@digibel.org>
   
Web
    [http://tina.kangaroot.net/] http://tina.kangaroot.net/
   
Meetings
    [http://tina.kangaroot.net/meetings/meetings.html] Hof van Rieth,
    Molenlei 68, B-2640 Mortsel
   
Mailinglist
    <mailinglist@tina.kangaroot.net>
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.25. ULYSSIS (Leuven)

Address
   
              Holleberg
    Schapenstraat 37, lokaal 91 97
    B-3000 Leuven
   
Mail-address
   
              Residentie Vinckenbosch
    Parkstraat 137-139, flat 305
    B-3000 Leuven
   
Email
    <ulyssis@ulyssis.org>
   
Web
    [http://www.ulyssis.org/] http://www.ulyssis.org/
   
Extra
    Only for KULeuven students and KULeuven personnel
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.26. WOLF (Mechelen)

Email
    <TeeCee@WOLF-Mechelen.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.wolf-mechelen.be/] http://www.wolf-mechelen.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.27. Zeus WPI (Gent)

Address
   
    Krijgslaan 281 S9
    B-9000 Gent
   
Phone
    +32 (0)9 264 47 51
   
Email
    <info@zeus.rug.ac.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.zeus.rug.ac.be/] http://www.zeus.rug.ac.be/
   
Comment
    Restricted to RUG students
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5. Belgian Linux businesses

 The Linux Documentation Project contains worldwide lists of Linux
businesses, Linux Consultants HOWTO and V.A.R. HOWTO, and can be found at:
[http://www.linuxports.com/] http://www.linuxports.com/.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.1. aDOC Services

Address
   
    Avenue du Pesage, 31-33
    B-1050 Brussels
   
Phone
    +32 (0)2 646 00 76
   
Email
    <sales@adoc-services.com>
   
Web
    [http://www.adoc-services.com/] http://www.adoc-services.com/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.2. Ampersant

Address
   
    Dr. Jacobsstraat 3
    B-2570 Duffel
   
Phone
    +32 (0)15 323 619
   
Fax
    +32 (0)15 323 790
   
Contact
    <jeff.verheyen@ampersant.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.ampersant.be/] http://www.ampersant.be/
   
Type of support
    Installation, configuration, support, (onsite) maintenance, training,
    webdevelopment.
   
Special expertise
    'Astaro Security Linux' partner. Distribution, installation and support
    for these Linux based firewalls.
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.3. Arafox

Address
   
    Avenue Joseph Wybranlaan 40
    B-1070 Brussels
           
   
Phone
    +32 (0)2 529 59 91
   
Fax
    +32 (0)2 529 59 92
   
Email
    <info@arafox.com>
   
Web
    [http://www.arafox.com/] http://www.arafox.com/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.4. Aragne

Address
   
    Boulevard Général Michel 1E
    B-6000 Charleroi
   
Phone
    +32 (0)71 270 389
   
Email
    <info@aragne.com>
   
Web
    [http://www.aragne.com/] http://www.aragne.com/
   
Contact
    Denis Frère <denis.frere@aragne.com>
   
Special expertise
    GNU/Linux services, specially Python and Zope solutions (websites,
    intranet, Internet connectivity, ...)
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.5. Better Access nv

Address
   
    Geldenaakse Vest 6
    B-3000 Leuven
   
Phone
    +32 (0)16 298 045
   
Fax
    +32 (0)16 298 046
   
Email
    <info@ba.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.ba.be/] http://www.ba.be/
   
Type of support
    After an onsite installation, we mainly support our customers with SSH
    remote administration. Most problems are reported by E-mail or by the
    inhouse-developped webbased supportsystem. This doesn't mean that once in
    a while a supportcall comes in.
   
Special expertise
    Security, systemadministration and setups, security (firewalling,
    tigerteaming, VPN, etc.) Networkdesign, wireless networking,
    Troubleshooting, product development, etc. Please visit http://www.ba.be
    for more info.
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.6. Consultux

Address
   
    Alfons Jeurissenstraat 53
    B-3500 Hasselt
   
Phone
    +32 (0)474 91 55 61
   
Email
    <info@consultux.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.consultux.be/] http://www.consultux.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.7. CoreSequence Consultancy & Training

Address
   
    Tiensestraat 243/3
    B-3000 Leuven
   
Phone
    +32 (0)472 689 497
   
Fax
    +32 (0)16 29 99 32
   
Email
    <info@coresequence.com>
   
Web
    [http://www.coresequence.com/] http://www.coresequence.com/
   
Contact
    Machtelt Garrels <sales@coresequence.com>
   
Special expertise
    Consultancy: disaster recovery, troubleshooting. Training: Dutch/French/
    English speaking trainers.
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.8. CSS nv

Address
   
    Henneaulaan 366
    B-1930 Zaventem
   
Phone
    +32 (0)2 718 53 33
   
Fax
    +32 (0)706 53 306
   
Type of support
    support on networking, installation, hardware maintenance, Red Hat
    certified reseller
   
Special expertise
    Red Hat RHCE
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.9. D. Connect

Address
   
    Av. Van Goidtsnoven 33
    B-1180 Uccle
   
Email
    <webmaster@dconnect.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.dconnect.be/] http://www.dconnect.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.10. Digibel

Address
   
    Oude Leuvensebaan 57
    B-3460 Bekkevoort
   
Phone
    +32 (0)473 269 112
   
Fax
    +32 (0)13 55 66 99
   
Email
    <info@digibel.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.digibel.be/] http://www.digibel.be/
   
Contact
    Joan Lavrijs <joan@digibel.be>
   
Type of support
    Digibel (since 1995) uses its competence in Open Source software to
    deliver solutions, consultancy, development, remote administration,
    training and support with a strong focus on security. All our consultants
    have been using Linux since 1995 and have extensive Open Source
    experience.
   
Special expertise
    We maintain the qmail-sql patch in which qmail gets integrated with MySQL
    or PostgreSQL databases. Our unique key product is the SUS (Security
    Update Service) in which we intensively manage the security of servers.
    Closely related to SUS are our high quality VPN/Firewall/
    Router-solutions. We also deliver virtually all kind of company-servers
    (file-,web-,fax-,mail-,name-,print-,database-,.. servers). We have
    acquired a special expertise with the Red Hat distributions.
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.11. Dolmen

Address
   
              Industriepark Zenneveld
    Vaucampslaan 42
    B-1654 Huizingen
   
Phone
    +32 (0)2 362 55 55
   
Fax
    +32 (0)2 362 55 99
   
Email
    <info@dolmen.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.dolmen.be/] http://www.dolmen.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.12. DS Improve bvba

Address
   
              European Erasmus Business & Innovation Center
    Joseph Wybranlaan 40
    B-1070 Brussels
   
Phone
    +32 (0)2 529 59 41
   
Fax
    +32 (0)2 529 59 54
   
Email
    <info@dsimprove.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.dsimprove.be/] http://www.dsimprove.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.13. EMMO Service

Address
   
    Jan Van Harcourtlaan 7
    B-3200 Aarschot
   
Phone
    +32 (0)16 565 708
   
Fax
    +32 (0)16 569 963
   
Email
    <info@emmo.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.emmo.be/] http://www.emmo.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.14. FKS bvba

Address
   
    Luikersteenweg 65
    B-3500 Hasselt
   
Phone
    +32 (0)11 214 911
   
Fax
    +32 (0)11 220 419
   
Email
    <info@fks.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.fks.be/] http://www.fks.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.15. Glasshouse Business Networks bvba

Address
   
    Hessenstraatje 20 loft 1.1
    B-2000 Antwerp
   
Phone
    +32 (0)3 234 96 96
   
Fax
    +32 (0)3 234 96 97
   
Email
    <info@glasshouse.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.glasshouse.be/] http://www.glasshouse.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.16. Grmbl productions

Address
   
    Korte Vuldersstraat 30
    B-8000 Brugge
   
Phone
    +32 (0)50 674 512
   
Fax
    +32 (0)50 342 623
   
Email
    <info@grmbl.com>
   
Web
    [http://www.grmbl.com/] http://www.grmbl.com/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.17. Hellea sprl

Address
   
    Rue de Prague 61
    B-1060 Brussels
   
Web
    [http://www.hellea.be/] http://www.hellea.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.18. IBM Belgium sa/nv

Address
   
    Square Victoria Regina 1
    B-1210 Brussels
   
Phone
    +32 (0)2 225 33 33
   
Fax
    +32 (0)2 225 24 73
   
Email
    <blueline@be.ibm.com>
   
Web
    [http://www.ibm.com/be/] http://www.ibm.com/be/
   
Contact
    Sam Versluys <sam_versluys@be.ibm.com>
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.19. IP Net generation

Address
   
    Cyriel Verschaevelaan 12
    B-2980 Zoersel
   
Phone
    +32 (0)477 513 987
   
Email
    <info@ipng.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.ipng.be/] http://www.ipng.be/
   
Special expertise
    IPnG focuses on Open Source software development.
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.20. Kangaroot Linux Solutions

Address
   
    Grote Steenweg 91
    B-2600 Berchem (Antwerp)
   
Phone
    +32 (0)3 286 17 17
   
Fax
    +32 (0)3 281 23 49
   
Email
    <info@kangaroot.net>
   
Web
    [http://www.kangaroot.net/] http://www.kangaroot.net/
   
Contact
    Peter Dens <peter@kangaroot.net>
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.21. Linugen

Address
   
    Borkelstraat 2/4
    B-2900 Schoten
   
Phone
    +32 (0)3 685 39 81
   
Fax
    +32 (0)3 293 33 43
   
Email
    <hello@linugen.com>
   
Web
    [http://www.linugen.com/] http://www.linugen.com/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.22. LinuxIdee

Address
   
    Prins Albertstraat 35
    B-8310 Brugge
   
Phone
    +32 (0)494 607 037
   
Fax
    +32 (0)50 364 341
   
Web
    [http://www.linuxidee.com/] http://www.linuxidee.com/
   
Contact
    Jurgen Defurne <jurgen.defurne@pandora.be>
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.23. Mind

Address
   
    Vaartkom 11
    B-3000 Leuven
   
Phone
    +32 (0)16 309 666
   
Fax
    +32 (0)16 309 644
   
Email
    <info@mind.be>
   
Web
    [http://mind.be/] http://mind.be/
   
Contact
    Peter Vandenabeele <peter.vandenabeele@mind.be>
   
Type of support
    Device drivers, porting to new platforms, development (fixed price),
    set-up of development environment, on-site support (outsourcing),
    architecture study and training.
   
Special expertise
    Mind uses Open Source software (Linux, RTLinux, RTAI, eCos, Wonka, gcc,
    gdb, etc.) to set up basic infrastructure for new embedded systems based
    on various embedded processors: ARM, StrongARM, XScale, PowerPC, MIPS,
    x86, ...
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.24. Minotaur Solutions

Address
   
    Astridlaan 199
    B-8310 Brugge
   
Phone
    +32 (0)475 311 650
   
Email
    <ldp@minotaur-solutions.com>
   
Web
    [http://www.minotaur-solutions.com/] http://www.minotaur-solutions.com/
   
Contact
    Maarten Loose <maarten.loose@minotaur-solutions.com>
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.25. Neolabs

Address
   
    Zwarte Zusterstraat 16
    B-3000 Leuven
   
Phone
    +32 (0)16 236 342
   
Fax
    +32 (0)16 650 497
   
Email
    <info@neolabs.be>
   
Web
    [http://www.neolabs.be/] http://www.neolabs.be/
   
Contact
    Maarten Slaets <maarten.slaets@neolabs.be>
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.26. OpenSides

Address
   
    Rue des Palais 44/33
    B-1030 Brussels
   
Email
    <info@opensides.be>
   
Phone
    +32 (0)2 211 34 83
   
Fax
    +32 (0)2 218 89 73
   
Web
    [http://www.opensides.be/] http://www.opensides.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.27. Phidani Software sprl

Address
   
    Rue de l'autonomie 1
    B-1070 Brussels
   
Email
    <info@phidani.be>
   
Phone
    +32 (0)2 552 06 63
   
Fax
    +32 (0)2 522 09 30
   
Web
    [http://www.phidani.be/] http://www.phidani.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.28. Qbian Linux Systems

Address
   
    Bischoppenhoflaan 289
    B-2100 Antwerp
   
Email
    <info@qbian.com>
   
Phone
    +32 (0)9 328 93 28
   
Fax
    +32 (0)9 326 08 88
   
Web
    [http://www.qbian.com/] http://www.qbian.com/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.29. Si-Lab

Email
    <toon@si-lab.com>
   
Phone
    +32 (0)486 149 048
   
Web
    [http://www.si-lab.com/] http://www.si-lab.com/
   
Contact
    Toon Knapen <toon@si-lab.com>
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.30. Spier bvba

Address
   
    Knaptandstraat 96-98
    B-9100 Sint-Niklaas
   
Email
    <info@spier.be>
   
Phone
    +32 (0)3 765 90 61
   
Fax
    +32 (0)3 765 90 62
   
Web
    [http://www.spier.be/] http://www.spier.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.31. Stone-IT Belgium

Address
   
              Minerva Office Brussels
    Minervastraat 14b
    B-1930 Zaventem
   
Email
    <info@be.stone-it.com>
   
Phone
    +32 (0)2 720 88 35
   
Fax
    +32 (0)2 720 51 71
   
Web
    [http://www.be.stone-it.com/] http://www.be.stone-it.com/
   
Contact
    Martijn Smit <smit@stone-it.com>
   
Type of support
    Stone-IT is a 'one-stop' Linux provider for integrating business
    environments in which we offer: Linux Consulting, Linux Solutions, Linux
    Support and Linux Education.
   
Special expertise
    Stone-IT offers high quality Linux expertise and can develop, test and
    implement Linux in several different business environments such as all
    kinds of servers (File-/Web-/Name-/Mail-/Print servers), as well as
    Clustering, VPN, Storage, Firewalls & Routers. Our support consists of
    Pro Active Monitoring, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Besides having
    trainers being a Red Hat Certified Engineer we offer Distribution
    Independent Education.
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.32. Supporting Open Source cvba

Address
   
    Zijpstraat 14
    B-2570 Duffel
   
Email
    <info@sos.be>
   
Phone
    +32 (0)15 310 271
   
Fax
    +32 (0)15 310 381
   
Web
    [http://www.sos.be/] http://www.sos.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.33. Sygmanet

Address
   
    Hulststraat 8
    B-3290 Diest
   
Email
    <info@sygmanet.be>
   
Phone
    +32 (0)13 312 203
   
Fax
    +32 (0)13 312 203
   
Web
    [http://www.sygmanet.be/] http://www.sygmanet.be/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.34. Théridion sprlfs

Address
   
    Rue de l'Aqueduc, 83
    B-1050 Brussels
   
Email
    <info@theridion.com>
   
Phone
    +32 (0)2 539 32 28
   
Fax
    +32 (0)2 539 19 54
   
Web
    [http://www.theridion.com/] http://www.theridion.com/
   
Contact
    Renaud Dans <renaud.dans@theridion.com>
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.35. UWYN

Address
   
    Lambermontlaan 148
    B-1030 Brussels
   
Email
    <info@uwyn.com>
   
Phone
    +32 (0)2 245 41 06
   
Web
    [http://www.uwyn.com/] http://www.uwyn.com/
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.36. VirgoPlus sprl

Address
   
    Rue E. Solvay 29 A
    B-4000 Liège
   
Phone
    +32 (0)4 253 00 59
   
Fax
    +32 (0)4 253 00 49
   
Email
    <staff@virgoplus.com>
   
Web
    [http://www.virgoplus.com/] http://www.virgoplus.com/
   
Contact
    Bruno Mairlot <bruno@virgoplus.com>
   
Type of support
    By phone, email, or remote networked administration, inhouse, onsite
   
Special expertise
    Installation, configuration, administration of Linux, internet
    connection, intranet developpment, firewalls, samba, netatalk, firewalls,
    proxys, DNS, web server (Apache), mod_perl, MySQL, Gui interface
    developpment (GTK+). We have acquired a special expertise with the Red
    Hat distributions.
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
6. Belgian Linux resources

6.1. Websites

6.1.1. Linux in Belgium

  * [http://dag.wieers.com/howto/] Belgian HOWTO
   
  * [http://users.pandora.be/wouter.verhelst/FAQ] be.comp.os.linux FAQ
   
  * [http://www.belgian-lugs.be/] Belgian LUGS
   
  * [http://www.linuxbelgium.net/] LinuxBelgium.net
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.1.2. Dutch Linux-related sites

  * [http://nl.linux.org/] Nederlandstalige Linux homepage _the_ Linux source
    for Flanders and the Netherlands
   
  * [http://nl.linux.org/doc/] Nederlandstalige Linux Documentatie Project
    most Linux HOWTOs translated to Dutch
   
  * [http://www.linux-nl.cx/] Linux Support Website
   
  * [http://www.mech.kuleuven.ac.be/%7Ebruyninc/etos/] EToS: Educatieve
    Toepassingen van Open Software
   
  * [http://www.openstandaarden.be/] A Flemish website about Open Standards
   
  * [http://user.online.be/~koendb/linux_beginners.html] Beginnen met Linux
   
  * [http://user.online.be/~koendb/redhat.html] Installatie Handleiding
    RedHat 5.2
   
  * [http://users.pandora.be/wouter.verhelst/configure.html] Configure.help
    in het Nederlands
   
  * [http://inf-beheer.sourceforge.net/] Cursus Linux voor Informaticabeheer
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.1.3. French Linux-related sites

  * [http://linuxbe.org/] LinuxBe.Org
   
  * [http://www.ael.be/] Association Electronique LIBRE
   
  * [http://club.euronet.be/dany.vanderroost/howto.html] Belgian HOWTO in
    french
   
  * [http://www.linux-france.org/] linux-france.org
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.1.4. Mirrors in Belgium

  * [http://be.eu.mirrors.freshmeat.net/] Freshmeat at UPC Belgium
    (Chello,TVD)
   
  * [http://winbe.linuxberg.com/] Linuxberg at Wallonie Internet
   
  * [http://online.linuxberg.com/] Linuxberg at Online
   
  * [http://pandora.linuxberg.com/] Linuxberg at Pandora (Telenet)
   
  * [http://sunsite.belnet.be/alug/ftp_mirrors/linux_gazette/] Linux Gazette
    at Belnet
   
  * [http://linuxgazette.linuxbe.org] Linux Gazette at Linuxbe
   
  * [http://linuxfocus.linuxbe.org] LinuxFocus
   
  * [http://linux-france.linuxbe.org] Linux France
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.2. HOWTO

 The most important collection of Linux information on the net. Please if you
encounter erroneous information in one of them, do contact the author. Only
that way it will be corrected and we all stand together ;)

  * [http://www.kulnet.kuleuven.ac.be/LDP/] HOWTO's at K.U.Leuven
   
  * [http://www.double-barrel.be/linux_web/LDP/] HOWTO's at Double-Barrel
   
  * [http://www.sin.khk.be/mirror/LDP/] HOWTO's at SIN
   
  * [http://ldp.linuxbe.org/] HOWTO's at Linuxbe.org
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.3. HOWTO translations

 As Dutch is less wide-spread, it is the least supported. But work is being
done to resolve this ;) (and maybe *you* can help ?!?) French and German
translations obviously are already taken care of.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.3.1. Dutch

 A succesfull initiative is making progress, but there's still a lot to do.
If you want to help, start translating and send it there. Check [http://
nl.linux.org/doc/HOWTO/] http://nl.linux.org/doc/HOWTO/.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.3.2. French

 French translations of HOWTO's can be found at: [http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/
Linux/docs/HOWTO/translations/fr/] http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/Linux/docs/
HOWTO/translations/fr/
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.3.3. German

 German translations of HOWTO's can be found at: [http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/
Linux/docs/HOWTO/translations/de/] http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/Linux/docs/
HOWTO/translations/de/
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

6.4. FTP

6.4.1. Kernel-source mirrors

  * [ftp://ftp1.be.kernel.org/pub/linux/kernel/] Official Mirror
    kernel-sources at Belnet
   
  * [ftp://ftp2.be.kernel.org/pub/linux/kernel/] Official Mirror
    kernel-sources at UPC Belgium (Chello,TVD)
   
  * [ftp://ftp.tiscalinet.be/pub/linux/kernel/] Kernel-sources at Tiscalinet
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.4.2. Distribution mirrors

  *   [http://www.redhat.com/download/mirror.html] Red Hat Mirrors
   
      + [ftp://ftp.belnet.be/mirror/ftp.redhat.com/] Official Mirror at
        Belnet
       
      + [ftp://ftp.easynet.be/redhat/] Official Mirror at Easynet
       
      + [ftp://mirrors.pandora.be/mirrors/ftp.redhat.com/] Mirror at Pandora
        (Telenet)
       
      + [ftp://ftp.chello.be/mirror/ftp.redhat.com/] Mirror at UPC Belgium
        (Chello,TVD)
       
   
  *   [http://www.debian.org/misc/README.mirrors] Debian
   
      + [ftp://ftp.belnet.be/mirror/ftp.debian.org/] Official Mirror at
        Belnet
       
      + [ftp://ftp.kulnet.kuleuven.ac.be/pub/mirror/ftp.debian.org/] Official
        Mirror at KULeuven
       
      + [ftp://mirrors.pandora.be/mirrors/ftp.debian.org/] Official Mirror at
        Pandora (Telenet)
       
      + [ftp://ftp.easynet.be/debian/] Official Mirror at Easynet
       
      + [ftp://ftp.tiscalinet.be/debian/] Official Mirror at Tiscalinet
       
      + [ftp://ftp.skynet.be/mirror2/debian-ftp/] Mirror at Skynet
       
      + [ftp://debian.spnet.net/] Mirror at spnet
       
   
  *   Mandrake
   
      + [ftp://ftp.belnet.be/packages/mandrake/] Mirror at Belnet
       
      + [ftp://ftp.tvd.be/pub/mirror/ftp0.sunet.se/pub/Linux/distributions/
        mandrake/] Mirror at UPC Belgium (Chello,TVD)
       
   
  *   SuSE
   
      + [ftp://ftp.belnet.be/mirror/ftp.suse.com/] Mirror at Belnet
       
      + [ftp://mirrors.pandora.be/mirrors/ftp.suse.com/] Mirror at Pandora
        (Telenet)
       
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.4.3. Mirrors in Belgium

  * [ftp://ftp.belnet.be/mirror/] Mirrors at Belnet
   
  * [ftp://ftp.chello.be/mirror/] Mirrors at UPC Belgium (Chello,TVD)
   
  * [ftp://mirrors.pandora.be/mirrors/] Mirrors at Pandora (Telenet)
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.5. Usenet/Newsgroups

  * [news:be.comp.os.linux] be.comp.os.linux at [http://groups.google.com/
    groups?hl=en&lr=&safe=off&group=be.comp.os.linux] Google
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.6. IRC

 The fastest medium to get support is IRC, but beware. Because IRC is rather
anonymous it's also easy to deceive people.

 On IRCnet there's a channel called #linux.be that is closely related to bcol
and the Belgian Linux-scene. The channel is still small, but it surely will
grow in time. To get help in English, there's only one place #linux.

 Also Dalnet has a #linux.be channel.
