Conexant/Rockwell modem HOWTO

Imran Ghory

ImranG@btinternet.com

2001-08-01
Revision History                                                             
Revision 1.3            2002-03-12             Revised by: ig                
Updated to deal with new HCF driver.                                         
Revision 1.2            2002-02-21             Revised by: ig                
Updated to deal with new HSF driver and release date for HCF driver.         
Revision 1.0            2001-09-09             Revised by: ig                
Added entries to the FAQ, corrected grammatical errors, and update a URL.    
Revision 0.9            2001-08-01             Revised by: ig                
Initial release.                                                             


 A guide to using Conexant and Rockwell chipset based Software modems under
Linux. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table of Contents
1. Introduction
    1.1. Purpose of the howto
    1.2. About the howto
    1.3. Feedback
    1.4. License
    1.5. Acknowledgments
    1.6. Getting Help
   
   
2. Quick Start guide
    2.1. Quick Starting with an HCF modem
   
   
3. Identifying your modem type
4. HCF chipset based modems
    4.1. History
    4.2. Miscellaneous information
   
   
5. HSF
    5.1. History
    5.2. Kernel 2.2.14 - 18
    5.3. Kernel 2.4.*
    5.4. Troubleshooting FAQ
   
   
A. License
    .1. GNU Free Documentation License
   
   

1. Introduction

1.1. Purpose of the howto

 If you've got a Rockwell or Conexant chipset based modem and you can't seem
to get the modem to work with Linux, then you've come to the right place.
Chances are that you've got a Software modem (also known as a "winmodem") and
you'll need a driver to get the modem working under Linux. 

 If you've got a Software modem whose chipset is not made by Conexant or
Rockwell then you should see the linmodem howto.  

 Note that this guide has no information about using Conexant/Rockwell modems
for operating systems other then Linux except for the following: There are no
known drivers for FreeBSD or BeOS, Windows drivers can be obtained from
Conexant. 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.2. About the howto

 This HOWTO originally started out as a website about installing Conexant HSF
modems under linux, but after several months of being online the number of
hits on the website was rapidly growing (100 hits/day at time of writing this
HOWTO) and so were the number of requests for information about Rockwell/
Conexant modems that were being posted to the linmodem mailing list, usenet
and various web based forums. This lead me to decide that the information
needed another distribution medium which would be more accessible to users.
The result of this was this HOWTO which has expanded to include a far larger
range of information then the original website had, in order to cover all the
questions being asked on the internet.

At the same time as the increase in demand for information about Rockwell/
Conexant modems under linux a number of non-english webpages appeared
explaining how to setup the drivers in languages as diverse as Portuguese and
Japanese, these webpages often lacked all the current information which was
available making it harder for users to get their modems to work. I decided
to release this HOWTO under the GNU Free Documentation License, so that
native speakers of other language can translate this document into their own
language and redistribute it freely, thus ensuring that all users get all the
information regardless of what language they speak. If you're interested in
making a translation of this HOWTO please contact me.

 The HOWTO assumes a basic knowledge of Linux, you should be familiar with
the basics of how to use a console/terminal, how to use common commands like
less and be familiar with a text editor.When the howto needs you to type
something in at the console, the console prompt will look like this: '
[user@localhost]$ ' 

 Some parts of the howto rely upon a greater knowledge of Linux, but those
section will mainly apply if you have a non-standard Linux distribution.  
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.3. Feedback

 If you have any feedback on how I can improve this HOWTO or are interested
in translating this HOWTO into another language please contact me via email
at ImranG@btinternet.com(if you don't get a reply within a week resend the
message to imran@bits.bris.ac.uk).

 If you need some help in getting your modem to work, rather then contacting
me for help directly see the Getting Help section as you are more likely to
be able to get a faster answer from the places indicated then if you email me
direct.  
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.4. License

Copyright (c) 2001,2002 Imran Ghory

  Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under
the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or any later
version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the Invariant
Sections being the Introduction chapter, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with
no Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the license is included in the section
entitled "GNU Free Documentation License". 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.5. Acknowledgments

 Thanks to:

  *  Olitec for distributing and Conexant for producing the original HSF
    driver 
   
  *  Marc Boucher for writing a wrapper for 2.4.* kernels 
   
  *  Denis Havlik for bringing the Olitec driver to the attention of the rest
    of the Linmodem community 
   
  *  Thomas Iversen for mirroring the drivers 
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.6. Getting Help

If after following this HOWTO you still can't get your modem to work and you
haven't already done so, check the troubleshooting section at the end of this
HOWTO as it covers the most common problems. If you are still stuck then
there are three main places where you can get help,

Linmodem mailing list
     The Linmodem mailing list is the main place on the internet for
    discussion of the use of Software modems under Linux. If someone else has
    had the same problem as you chances are that someone on the Linmodem
    mailing list knows about it. To join the mailing list send a blank email
    to discuss-subscribe@linmodems.org, the mailing lists homepage is at 
    www.linmodems.org. 
   
SoftModems IRC channel
     If you want to talk to someone real time your best bet is the #
    SoftModems channel on the OpenProject's IRC network. See 
    www.openprojects.org for details or connect to eu.opirc.nu on port 6667.
   
Newsgroups
     The newsgroups comp.os.linux.hardware and comp.os.linux.setup often have
    people familiar with software modems. If you speak Italian the newsgroup 
    it.comp.os.linux.iniziare has people familiar with Conexant/Rockwell
    neewsgroups. 
   

 Remember when asking for help to include your modems Device ID, Vendor ID
and any error message you got.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Quick Start guide

This section tries to get you up and running as soon as possible, if you can
follow the steps given in this section and they work for you, you can ignore
the rest of this howto. This section is updated more often then the rest of
the HOWTO so will contain the most up to date information.

First you need to find out if your modem is an HSF or HCF modem. You can find
out from your modem by looking at it's Windows drivers or looking at the
label on it's chipset, or alternatively you can download the >

Quick Starting with an HSF modem
[1]
 Run the program hsfconfig and just follow the on-screen instructions and it
should automatically detect your modem and install the driver. If you have
any problems consult the documentation that comes with the driver.


You will now be able to setup your internet connection software, you may need
to tell it that your modem can be found at /dev/modem. If your internet
connection software can't access it you may need to change the permissions on
it.

 [Technical note: If you have a modem with device ID 2005, then you will need
to choose the option to manually configure it before it will work] 

 If the above steps don't work for you or the above mentioned driver doesn't
work with your system (for instance if you have an SMP machine) then read the
rest of the howto which explains how to use the older driver in greater
detail. 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1. Quick Starting with an HCF modem

 1.  Download the driver from http://www.mbsi.ca/hcflinux/, the following
    instruction are for the Binary RPM driver which is the easiest to
    install, if you want to install it using another method consult the
    README file.  
   
 2.  Load up a terminal (or go to a console), change to the root user and
    enter the directory you downloaded the driver to and use the command "rpm
    -i" followed by the name of the driver. For instance if it is called
    hcflinmodem-0.9mbsibeta02030801-1.i586.rpm you would enter,
   
     [user@localhost]$ rpm -i hcflinmodem-0.9mbsibeta02030801-1.i586.rpm
   
 3.  Run the program hcfconfig and just follow the on-screen instructions and
    it should automatically detect your modem and install the driver. If you
    have any problems consult the documentation that comes with the driver.
   

You will now be able to setup your internet connection software, you may need
to tell it that your modem can be found at /dev/modem. If your internet
connection software can't access it you may need to change the permissions on
it.

 [Technical note: If you have an older modem, i.e one with the Rockwell brand
name rather then Conexant then you will not be able to use this driver at
present. You will also not be able to use modems which use SmartDAA. See 
http://www.mbsi.ca/hcflinux/latest/BUGS.txt for updates.] 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. Identifying your modem type

 The first task you will need to do is to identify whether your modem's
chipset is HCF or HSF. Unfortunately the traditional way of doing this (by
using /proc/pci, lspci or KDE's control center) won't work for us here due to
errors in the pci.ids file which can cause a misidentification of the modem.
There are three main ways which you can use to identify your modem's chipset:

 1.  If you've got your modem working under Windows then you can identify
    your chipset by downloading and running Conexant's ListModem Application.
    When you run it, the program will give the information we want under
    "MODEM TYPE". 
   
 2.  If you've opened your computer up chances are that the modem's chipset
    will have either the letters "HSF" or "HCF" printed on it. 
   
 3.  You can identify your type of modem from it's device ID and vendor ID,
    the easiest way get this information is from the command lspci -n (or 
    less /proc/pci on older Linux distributions) this command tells you all
    of the Vendor IDs and Devices IDs for all of the PCI cards in your
    machine. You will be able to identify your modems' IDs as it will have a
    vendor ID of either 14F1 (Conexant) or 127A (Rockwell). Ignore any
    information that the lspci command tells you about your modem being a HSF
    or HCF as it could be wrong. 
   
    The information is often presented in the form VVVV:DDDD where VVVV is
    the vendor ID and DDDD is the device ID, for instance if it listed 127a:
    2005 it would mean the that the Vendor ID is 127a and device ID is 2005.
   
     If your modem is a HCF modem it will have one of the following Device
    IDs: 
   
     1033 / 1034 / 1035 / 1036 / 10b3 / 10b4 / 10b5 / 10b6 / 1003 / 1004 /
    1005 / 1023 / 1024 / 1025 / 1f10 / 1f11 / 1f14 / 1f15 
   
     If your modem is a SmartHCF modem it will have one of the following
    Device IDs: 
   
     1052 / 1053 / 1054 / 1055 / 1056 / 1057 / 1058 / 1059 / 1063 / 1064 /
    1065 / 1066 
   
     If your modem is a HSF modem it will have one of the following Device
    IDs: 
   
     2013 / 2014 / 2015 / 2016 / 2003 / 2004 / 2005 / 2006 / 2f10 / 2f12 /
    2f00 
   
     If your modem is a SmartHSF modem it will have one of the following
    Device IDs: 
   
     2043 / 2044 / 2045 / 2046 / 2053 / 2054 / 2055 / 2056 
   

 If you have a HCF or SmartHCF modem goto to the HCF section, if you have a
HSF or SmartHSF modem go the to the HSF section. 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. HCF chipset based modems

4.1. History

 Unfortunately at the present time there is no HCF modem driver for linux.
Conexant have indicated in section 11 of their FAQ (http://www.conexant.com:
80/cnxt/customer/md_faqs.htm) that they are currently developing one. 

 Several people have reported that they have got a HCF modem (in particular
chipsets with the device ID of 1025) to work under Linux by using the HSF
driver, however little firm information is known about this. If you
successfully manage to use an HCF modem under linux please contact me to tell
me about it. 

 One person has reported that if you get the "No Dialtone" error when trying
to use a HSF driver with a HCF modem you can correct it by using the AT
command "AT S7=45 S0=0 L1 V1 X4 &c1 E1 Q0". 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.2. Miscellaneous information

 If you wish to embark on writing your own driver you might find the
following files useful, 

Information on how to edit the INF file
     http://users.freenet.am/~hcfconf/advdocs/country.zip 
   
Modem command guide
     http://users.freenet.am/~hcfconf/advdocs/100498C.zip 
   
Designers notes and specifications
     http://www.unitronic.de/Hersteller/conexant/Modem.htm  
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5. HSF

5.1. History

 A HSF driver first appeared out of the blue in mid-2000 when Olitec released
unto the world a binary only driver for their Olitec PCI modem for 2.2.14
kernel, it wasn't long before someone realized that the Olitec modem was
based on the Rockwell/Conexant HSF Chipset. Inquiries to Olitec revealed that
the driver should work with any HSF chipset as there was nothing in the
driver that was specific to the Olitec modems. Many people tried to get the
driver to work with non-Olitec modem unfortunately without success, however a
few months later and after many hours of work by many people trying a variety
of tricks to get the driver to work, several people managed to stumble across
the solution. It was a simple one line change to file which solved the
problem and the world was left with a working HSF driver, at the time it only
worked on 2.2.14 Kernels and Olitec had refused to release the source code to
let others try to get it to work with other kernels. 

 A few months later Olitec released the driver for 2.2.16 and 2.2.17 kernels,
this kept the HSF winmodem community satisfied until we came to the day when
the 2.4 kernel was released. None of the previous drivers appeared to work
with the 2.4 kernel and this caused problems for all those who wanted to
upgrade and also for the large number of new users who were using 2.4.*
kernel based distributions such as Mandrake 8 and RedHat 7.1. Not a word had
been heard out of Olitec since the 2.4 kernel was released, but Conexant had
announced that they intended to develop a Linux driver. After many months of
waiting for a 2.4.* driver Marc Boucher decided to something about it and
wrote a wrapper which allowed an old version of the driver to be used with
2.4.* kernels. 

 That's where we are now, Marc's wrapper is still in experimental development
stage but it works and many people are using it to connect to the internet
under Linux. 

 From the history you'll understand why the next section has to be split into
two sections one for 2.2.14 - 2.2.18 kernels and one for 2.4.* kernels. If
you don't know what kernel version you have you can find out by using the '
uname -r' command at the console window before proceeding to the appropriate
section of this HOWTO. 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.2. Kernel 2.2.14 - 18

5.2.1. Requirements

  Having either a 2.2.14, 2.2.16 or 2.2.17 kernel. It has been reported that
the driver for 2.2.17 kernels also works with 2.2.18 kernels. 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.2.2. Getting IDs

  To get the modem to work you'll need to get the Vendor ID and Device ID.
The easiest way to do this is to use the command "less /proc/pci" and scroll
until you find the PCI card which has a vendor ID of either 14F1 (Conexant)
or 127A (Rockwell) and note the Device ID. 

  You'll need to make an %HSFModem% line. 

  Copy down the following line somewhere, 

  %HSFModem% = ModemX, PCI\VEN_XXXX&DEV_YYYY&SUBSYS_YYYYXXXX 

  Replacing the XXXX's with your Vendor ID and the YYYY's with your Device
ID, so if your Vendor ID is 127A and Device ID is 2015 your line would be, 

  %HSFModem% = ModemX, PCI\VEN_127A&DEV_2015&SUBSYS_2015127A 

You'll need to use this line later on to allow the driver to detect your
modem, the next steps you need to take vary slightly depending on what kernel
you have so you'll need to refer to the appropriate section depending on
whether your kernel version is 2.2.14, 2.2.16 or 2.2.17
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.2.3. If you have a 2.2.14 kernel

Installing a HSF driver on a 2.2.14 kernel

 1.   Download the file HSF_V1.01.02_K2.2.14-5.0.tar, it can be obtained from
    Olitec's site or the mirror. 
   
 2. Copy it to your home directory
   
 3. In a console window change to your home directory
   
    [user@localhost]$ cd ~
   
 4. Decompress the file
   
    [user@localhost]$ tar xzvf HSF_V1.01.02_K2.2.14-5.0.tar
   
 5. Enter into the drivers directory
   
    [user@localhost]$ cd pci_56k_v2
   
 6. Load up the lin_hsf.inf file in your favorite text editor, under the
    section [generic] you'll see a few of lines like "%HSFModem% = ModemX,
    PCI\VEN_127A&DEV_1025&SUBSYS_1025127A" under theses lines add your own
    %HSFModem% line which you made earlier.
   
 7. Switch to root
   
    [user@localhost]$ su
   
 8. Run the ins_all script to install the driver
   
    [user@localhost]$ ./ins_all
   

You will now be able to access the internet by telling your dial-up software
that your modem is located at /dev/modem.

The ins_all will only temporarily load the modem driver and the modem driver
will be removed when you reboot. So if you re boot you will need to run the .
/ins_all program to reload the driver, if you reboot on a regular basis you
may want to set the . /ins_all command to automatically run every time your
computer loads up.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.2.4. If you have a 2.2.16 kernel

Installing a HSF driver on a 2.2.16 kernel

 1.   Download the file PCI_56K_V2_K2.2.16.tar.gz, it can be obtained from 
    Olitec's site or the Mirror.
   
 2. Copy it to your home directory
   
 3. In a console window change to your home directory
   
    [user@localhost]$ cd ~
   
 4. Decompress the file
   
    [user@localhost]$ tar xzvf PCI_56K_V2_K2.2.16.tar.gz
   
 5. Enter into the drivers directory
   
    [user@localhost]$ cd pci_56k_v2_k2.2.16
   
 6. Load up the lin_hsf.inf file in your favorite text editor, under the
    section [generic] you'll see a few of lines like "%HSFModem% = ModemX,
    PCI\VEN_127A&DEV_1025&SUBSYS_1025127A" under theses lines add your own
    %HSFModem% line which you made earlier.
   
 7. Switch to root
   
    [user@localhost]$ su
   
 8. Run the ins_all script to install the driver
   
    [user@localhost]$ ./ins_all
   

You will now be able to access the internet by telling your dial-up software
that your modem is located at /dev/modem.

The ins_all will only temporarily load the modem driver and the modem driver
will be removed when you reboot. So if you reboot you will need to run the ./
ins_all program to reload the driver, if you reboot on a regular basis you
may want to set the ./ins_all command to automatically run every time your
computer loads up. 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.2.5. If you have a 2.2.17 or 2.2.18 kernel

Installing a HSF driver on a 2.2.17 or 2.2.18 kernel

 1.  Download the file PCI_56K_V2_K2.2.17.tar.gz , it can be obtained from 
    Olitec's site or the Mirror.
   
 2. Copy it to your home directory
   
 3. In a console window change to your home directory
   
    [user@localhost]$ cd ~
   
 4. Decompress the file
   
    [user@localhost]$ tar xzvf PCI_56K_V2_K2.2.17.tar.gz
   
 5. Enter into the drivers directory
   
    [user@localhost]$ cd pci_56k_v2_k2.2.17
   
 6. Load up the lin_hsf.inf file in your favorite text editor, under the
    section [generic] you'll see a few of lines like "%HSFModem% = ModemX,
    PCI\VEN_127A&DEV_1025&SUBSYS_1025127A" under theses lines add your own
    %HSFModem% line which you made earlier.
   
 7. Switch to root
   
    [user@localhost]$ su
   
 8. Run the ins_all script to install the driver
   
    [user@localhost]$ ./ins_all
   

  You will now be able to access the internet by telling your dial-up
software that your modem is located at /dev/modem. 

  The ins_all will only temporarily load the modem driver and the modem
driver will be removed when you reboot. So if you reboot you will need to run
the ./ins_all program to reload the driver, if you reboot on a regular basis
you may want to set the ./ins_all command to automatically run every time
your computer loads up. 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.3. Kernel 2.4.*

5.3.1. Requirements

  *  You need a 2.4.* kernel which does not have SMP support. 
   
  *   You will also need to have your kernel source available, if you don't
    have them installed already you can probably find them on your
    distributions CD. 
   
  *  At least version 2.4.0 of ppp (you can find what version of ppp you have
    installed by using the command pppd --version) 
   

To get the modem working under a 2.4.* kernel you'll need to use the driver
intended for 2.2.17 kernels alongside Marc Boucher's hsfcompat wrapper
program which lets the driver work with 2.4.* kernels. At the time of writing
the hsfcompat driver is on version 1.0d and is still experimental and may
cause problem with your system. However I haven't seen anyone have any
problem from using the wrapper. For the latest details see hsfcompat's
homepage.

Files you'll need to download:

hsfcompat_24-1.0d.tar.gz
     Main download site: 
   
     http://www.mbsi.ca/hsfcompat/hsfcompat_24-1.0d.tar.gz
   
   
PCI_56K_V2_K2.2.17.tar.gz
    Main download site:
   
    http://www.olitec.com/pub/PCI_56K_V2_K2.2.17.tar.gz
   
    Mirrored at:
   
     ftp://ftp.dina.kvl.dk/pub/Staff/Thomas.S.Iversen/linmodems_drivers/
    olitec/PCI_56K_V2_K2.2.17.tar.gz
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.3.2. Installing

 1. Copy the hsfcompat_24-1.0d.tar.gz file to your home directory
   
 2. In a console window change to your home directory
   
    [user@localhost]$ cd ~
   
 3. Extract the hcfcompat program by using:
   
    [user@localhost]$ tar xzvf hsfcompat_24-1.0d.tar.gz
   
 4.  Copy the PCI_56K_V2_K2.2.17.tar.gz file into the hsfcompat_24-1.0d
    directory. 
   
 5. Extract the driver by using:
   
     [user@localhost]$ tar xzvf PCI_56K_V2_K2.2.17.tar.gz 
   
 6.  Load up the file Makefile (Found in the hsfcompat_24-1.0d directory) in
    a text editor and scroll down to the line which reads SBINDIR=/usr/sbin
    and replace /usr/sbin with the location of your system bin directory,
    then scroll down to the line which reads KERNELSRC=/usr/src/linux and
    replace /usr/src/linux with the location of your kernel source files. 
   
 7. Switch to superuser (root) by using:
   
    [user@localhost]$ su  
   
 8.  In the hsfcompat_24-1.0d directory compile hsfcompat by using:
   
     [user@localhost]$  make 
   
 9. Install the driver by running: [user@localhost]$ make install 
   
10.   Follow the on-screen instruction which explain how to load the driver
    into memory and how to have this done automatically. 
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.4. Troubleshooting FAQ

5.4.1.  When running ./ins_all I get a kernel mismatch error ? 
5.4.2.  When I try to run ./ins_all I get the error "bash: ./ins_all No such
    file or directory."
5.4.3.  When installing the driver when it tries to load myserial.o I get a
    segmentation fault ? 
5.4.4.  When trying to dial my ISP I get "No Carrier" error ? 
5.4.5.  When running ./ins_alI get the error "No matching INF file is found
    for SoftK56 PCI device" ? 
5.4.6.  On my Laptop the driver seemed to install fine but I can't access my
    modem on /dev/modem ? 

5.4.1. When running ./ins_all I get a kernel mismatch error ? 

This means that the driver thinks that you don't have the appropriate kernel
version, if you have a variant of the kernel (such as the one that has
non-standard name) then you can still get the driver to work by loading up
the file ins_all in a text editor and replacing all of the 'insmod -m'
commands with 'insmod -f -m'. 

5.4.2. When I try to run ./ins_all I get the error "bash: ./ins_all No such
file or directory."

This error tends to be caused by the script being unable to find C Shell at
the location /bin/csh. If you have C Shell installed in a different location
then you should create a symbolic link which points to the correct location.
If you don't have you'll need to install it. 

5.4.3. When installing the driver when it tries to load myserial.o I get a
segmentation fault ? 

This is caused by your computer trying to get Plug-and-Play to work with your
modem. You can stop it doing this by going to your BIOS and setting an option
which tells it not to do that. The settings name varies from BIOS to BIOS but
is normally something like PnP OS. 

5.4.4. When trying to dial my ISP I get "No Carrier" error ? 

It has been reported that making the following changes to your configuration
will work:

 1.  Replace the command ATZ with ATZX3 
   
 2.  Replace the command ATDT with ATX3DT 
   

 

5.4.5. When running ./ins_alI get the error "No matching INF file is found
for SoftK56 PCI device" ? 

his occurs when the driver can't find the correct %HSFModem% line in the
lin_hsf.inf line, go back through the instructions and make sure that you
didn't make a mistake when making or entering the the %HSFModem% line. 

5.4.6. On my Laptop the driver seemed to install fine but I can't access my
modem on /dev/modem ? 

This is often caused by the modem's device number clashing with that of
PCMCIA, you can check if this is the case by entering the command,

[user@localhost]$ ls -l /dev/ | grep 254

You'll see the hsf0 device listed with the major number of 254, if any other
device also has the major number of 254 it means there is a clash. You can
fix this problem by loading up the ins_all file and change the line which
reads "mknod /dev/cnxt c 254 64" to "mknod /dev/cnxt c 253 64". 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A. License

.1. GNU Free Documentation License

Copyright 2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

 

Free Software Foundation, Inc.

59 Temple Place, Suite 330,

Boston,

MA 02111-1307

USA
. Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this
license document, but changing it is not allowed.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.1.1. 0. PREAMBLE

  The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other written
document "free" in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone the effective
freedom to copy and redistribute it, with or without modifying it, either
commercially or noncommercially. Secondarily, this License preserves for the
author and publisher a way to get credit for their work, while not being
considered responsible for modifications made by others.

  This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means that derivative works of
the document must themselves be free in the same sense. It complements the
GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft license designed for free
software.

  We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free
software, because free software needs free documentation: a free program
should come with manuals providing the same freedoms that the software does.
But this License is not limited to software manuals; it can be used for any
textual work, regardless of subject matter or whether it is published as a
printed book. We recommend this License principally for works whose purpose
is instruction or reference.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.1.2. 1. APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS

  This License applies to any manual or other work that contains a notice
placed by the copyright holder saying it can be distributed under the terms
of this License. The "Document", below, refers to any such manual or work.
Any member of the public is a licensee, and is addressed as "you".

  A "Modified Version" of the Document means any work containing the Document
or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with modifications and/or
translated into another language.

  A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a front-matter section of the 
Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the publishers or
authors of the Document to the Document's overall subject (or to related
matters) and contains nothing that could fall directly within that overall
subject. (For example, if the Document is in part a textbook of mathematics,
a Secondary Section may not explain any mathematics.) The relationship could
be a matter of historical connection with the subject or with related
matters, or of legal, commercial, philosophical, ethical or political
position regarding them.

  The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose titles are
designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice that says
that the Document is released under this License.

  The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text that are listed, as
Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that the 
Document is released under this License.

  A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy,
represented in a format whose specification is available to the general
public, whose contents can be viewed and edited directly and
straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images composed of
pixels) generic paint programs or (for drawings) some widely available
drawing editor, and that is suitable for input to text formatters or for
automatic translation to a variety of formats suitable for input to text
formatters. A copy made in an otherwise Transparent file format whose markup
has been designed to thwart or discourage subsequent modification by readers
is not Transparent. A copy that is not "Transparent" is called "Opaque".

  Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain ASCII
without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format, SGML or XML using a
publicly available DTD, and standard-conforming simple HTML designed for
human modification. Opaque formats include PostScript, PDF, proprietary
formats that can be read and edited only by proprietary word processors, SGML
or XML for which the DTD and/or processing tools are not generally available,
and the machine-generated HTML produced by some word processors for output
purposes only.

  The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the title page itself, plus
such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material this
License requires to appear in the title page. For works in formats which do
not have any title page as such, "Title Page" means the text near the most
prominent appearance of the work's title, preceding the beginning of the body
of the text.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.1.3. 2. VERBATIM COPYING

  You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either commercially
or noncommercially, provided that this License, the copyright notices, and
the license notice saying this License applies to the Document are reproduced
in all copies, and that you add no other conditions whatsoever to those of
this License. You may not use technical measures to obstruct or control the
reading or further copying of the copies you make or distribute. However, you
may accept compensation in exchange for copies. If you distribute a large
enough number of copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.

  You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and you
may publicly display copies.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.1.4. 3. COPYING IN QUANTITY

  If you publish printed copies of the Document numbering more than 100, and
the Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you must enclose the
copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover Texts:
Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on the back cover.
Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify you as the publisher of
these copies. The front cover must present the full title with all words of
the title equally prominent and visible. You may add other material on the
covers in addition. Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as
they preserve the title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be
treated as verbatim copying in other respects.

  If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit legibly,
you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit reasonably) on the
actual cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent pages.

  If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering more
than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent copy along
with each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy a
publicly-accessible computer-network location containing a complete
Transparent copy of the Document, free of added material, which the general
network-using public has access to download anonymously at no charge using
public-standard network protocols. If you use the latter option, you must
take reasonably prudent steps, when you begin distribution of Opaque copies
in quantity, to ensure that this Transparent copy will remain thus accessible
at the stated location until at least one year after the last time you
distribute an Opaque copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of
that edition to the public.

  It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the 
Document well before redistributing any large number of copies, to give them
a chance to provide you with an updated version of the Document.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.1.5. 4. MODIFICATIONS

  You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under the
conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release the Modified
Version under precisely this License, with the Modified Version filling the
role of the Document, thus licensing distribution and modification of the
Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy of it. In addition, you must do
these things in the Modified Version:

  * A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct
    from that of the Document, and from those of previous versions (which
    should, if there were any, be listed in the History section of the
    Document). You may use the same title as a previous version if the
    original publisher of that version gives permission.
   
  * B. List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities
    responsible for authorship of the modifications in the Modified Version,
    together with at least five of the principal authors of the Document (all
    of its principal authors, if it has less than five).
   
  * C. State on the Title Page the name of the publisher of the Modified
    Version, as the publisher.
   
  * D. Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.
   
  * E. Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications adjacent to
    the other copyright notices.
   
  * F. Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice
    giving the public permission to use the Modified Version under the terms
    of this License, in the form shown in the Addendum below.
   
  * G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections
    and required Cover Texts given in the Document's license notice.
   
  * H. Include an unaltered copy of this License.
   
  * I. Preserve the section entitled "History", and its title, and add to it
    an item stating at least the title, year, new authors, and publisher of
    the Modified Version as given on the Title Page. If there is no section
    entitled "History" in the Document, create one stating the title, year,
    authors, and publisher of the Document as given on its Title Page, then
    add an item describing the Modified Version as stated in the previous
    sentence.
   
  * J. Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for
    public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise the
    network locations given in the Document for previous versions it was
    based on. These may be placed in the "History" section. You may omit a
    network location for a work that was published at least four years before
    the Document itself, or if the original publisher of the version it
    refers to gives permission.
   
  * K. In any section entitled "Acknowledgements" or "Dedications", preserve
    the section's title, and preserve in the section all the substance and
    tone of each of the contributor acknowledgements and/or dedications given
    therein.
   
  * L. Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered in
    their text and in their titles. Section numbers or the equivalent are not
    considered part of the section titles.
   
  * M. Delete any section entitled "Endorsements". Such a section may not be
    included in the Modified Version.
   
  * N. Do not retitle any existing section as "Endorsements" or to conflict
    in title with any Invariant Section.
   

  If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or appendices
that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no material copied from the
Document, you may at your option designate some or all of these sections as
invariant. To do this, add their titles to the list of Invariant Sections in
the Modified Version's license notice. These titles must be distinct from any
other section titles.

  You may add a section entitled "Endorsements", provided it contains nothing
but endorsements of your Modified Version by various parties--for example,
statements of peer review or that the text has been approved by an
organization as the authoritative definition of a standard.

  You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a
passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list of 
Cover Texts in the Modified Version. Only one passage of Front-Cover Text and
one of Back-Cover Text may be added by (or through arrangements made by) any
one entity. If the Document already includes a cover text for the same cover,
previously added by you or by arrangement made by the same entity you are
acting on behalf of, you may not add another; but you may replace the old
one, on explicit permission from the previous publisher that added the old
one.

  The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License give
permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert or imply
endorsement of any Modified Version .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.1.6. 5. COMBINING DOCUMENTS

  You may combine the Document with other documents released under this
License, under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified versions,
provided that you include in the combination all of the Invariant Sections of
all of the original documents, unmodified, and list them all as Invariant
Sections of your combined work in its license notice.

  The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and multiple
identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single copy. If there are
multiple Invariant Sections with the same name but different contents, make
the title of each such section unique by adding at the end of it, in
parentheses, the name of the original author or publisher of that section if
known, or else a unique number. Make the same adjustment to the section
titles in the list of Invariant Sections in the license notice of the
combined work.

  In the combination, you must combine any sections entitled "History" in the
various original documents, forming one section entitled "History"; likewise
combine any sections entitled "Acknowledgements", and any sections entitled 
"Dedications". You must delete all sections entitled "Endorsements."
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.1.7. 6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS

  You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents
released under this License, and replace the individual copies of this
License in the various documents with a single copy that is included in the
collection, provided that you follow the rules of this License for verbatim
copying of each of the documents in all other respects.

  You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute it
individually under this License, provided you insert a copy of this License
into the extracted document, and follow this License in all other respects
regarding verbatim copying of that document.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.1.8. 7. AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS

  A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate and
independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or
distribution medium, does not as a whole count as a Modified Version of the
Document, provided no compilation copyright is claimed for the compilation.
Such a compilation is called an "aggregate", and this License does not apply
to the other self-contained works thus compiled with the Document , on
account of their being thus compiled, if they are not themselves derivative
works of the Document. If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is
applicable to these copies of the Document, then if the Document is less than
one quarter of the entire aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed
on covers that surround only the Document within the aggregate. Otherwise
they must appear on covers around the whole aggregate.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.1.9. 8. TRANSLATION

  Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may distribute
translations of the Document under the terms of section 4. Replacing 
Invariant Sections with translations requires special permission from their
copyright holders, but you may include translations of some or all Invariant
Sections in addition to the original versions of these Invariant Sections.
You may include a translation of this License provided that you also include
the original English version of this License. In case of a disagreement
between the translation and the original English version of this License, the
original English version will prevail.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.1.10. 9. TERMINATION

  You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except as
expressly provided for under this License. Any other attempt to copy, modify,
sublicense or distribute the Document is void, and will automatically
terminate your rights under this License. However, parties who have received
copies, or rights, from you under this License will not have their licenses
terminated so long as such parties remain in full compliance.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.1.11. 10. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE

  The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions of the GNU
Free Documentation License from time to time. Such new versions will be
similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to address
new problems or concerns. See [http://www.gnu.org/copyleft] http://
www.gnu.org/copyleft/.

  Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number. If
the Document specifies that a particular numbered version of this License "or
any later version" applies to it, you have the option of following the terms
and conditions either of that specified version or of any later version that
has been published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation. If the
Document does not specify a version number of this License, you may choose
any version ever published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.1.12. Addendum

  To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of the
License in the document and put the following copyright and license notices
just after the title page:

   
      Copyright © YEAR YOUR NAME.
   
      Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
    under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or any
    later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the 
    Invariant Sections being LIST THEIR TITLES, with the Front-Cover Texts
    being LIST, and with the Back-Cover Texts being LIST. A copy of the
    license is included in the section entitled "GNU Free Documentation
    License".
   
  If you have no Invariant Sections, write "with no Invariant Sections"
instead of saying which ones are invariant. If you have no Front-Cover Texts,
write "no Front-Cover Texts" instead of "Front-Cover Texts being LIST";
likewise for Back-Cover Texts.

  If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we recommend
releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of free software
license, such as the GNU General Public License, to permit their use in free
software.

Notes

[1]   1. Download the driver from http://www.mbsi.ca/hsflinux/, the following
         instruction are for the Binary RPM version which I recommend you    
         use.                                                                
                                                                             
      2. Load up a terminal (or go to a console), change to the root user and
         enter the directory you downloaded the driver to and use the command
         "rpm -i" followed by the name of the driver. For instance if it is  
         called hsflinmodem-4.06.06.02mbsibeta02012000-1.i586.rpm you would  
         enter,                                                              
                                                                             
         [user@localhost]$ rpm -i                                            
         hsflinmodem-4.06.06.02mbsibeta02012000-1.i586.rpm                   
                                                                             
                                                                             
