Linux + Windows HOWTO

Jonathan Katz

<jkatz@in.net>

Dr. Robert J. Meier

<robert.meier@fanucrobotics.com>

Eric Womack - Conversion from HTML to DocBook 4.1 (SGML)
Revision History                                                             
Revision 0.1.1                             2001-12-28                        
Conversion to SGML                                                           
Revision 0.1.0                             1999-11-04                        
Collected from LDP                                                           
Revision 0.0.2                             1999-10-21                        
First draft of Linux+Windows-HOWTO                                           
Revision 0.0.1                             1995-11-01                        
Wrote Linux+Win95                                                            


This HOWTO is aimed at assisting those who wish to use the features of both
Windows and Linux on the same host.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table of Contents
1. Overview
    1.1. Copyright and License
    1.2. Disclaimer
    1.3. Intended Audience
    1.4. How to Use This HOWTO
    1.5. Concepts
   
   
2. Procedure
    2.1. Reference
   
   
3. Choices
    3.1. Architecture
    3.2. Filesystems
    3.3. Linux Distribution
    3.4. Backup Tools
    3.5. Compaction Tools
    3.6. Repartitioning Tools
    3.7. Formating Tools
    3.8. Boot Managers
   
   
4. Actual Experiences - Adding linux to New Computer Preloaded with Windows
    98
    4.1. Configuration
   
   
A. Appendix
    A.1. Frequently Asked Questions
    A.2. Caveats
    A.3. Tips and Tricks
    A.4. Reference
   
   
Glossary
Bibliography

1. Overview

1.1. Copyright and License

This document, Linux+Windows HOWTO, is copyrighted (c) 1999 by Dr. Robert J.
Meier. Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or any
later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant
Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover Texts. A copy of
the license is available at [http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html] http://
www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.2. Disclaimer

No liability for the contents of this document can be accepted. Use the
concepts, examples and information at your own risk. There may be errors and
inaccuracies, that could be damaging to your system. Proceed with caution,
and although this is highly unlikely, the author(s) do not take any
responsibility.

All copyrights are held by their by their respective owners, unless
specifically noted otherwise. Use of a term in this document should not be
regarded as affecting the validity of any trademark or service mark. Naming
of particular products or brands should not be seen as endorsements.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.3. Intended Audience

[Nancy] Nancy just bought a new computer. It came preloaded with Windows 98.
Nancy wants to run accounting software supported by Windows 98 and
mathematical research software. Nancy is an accountant and donates her time
as the accountant for the local chapter of a charitable organization. The
charitable organization requires the chapters to use standard software that
they have chosen. This software is only supported on Windows 98, so Nancy
must have Windows 98 to donate her accounting services. Nancy also teaches
mathematics and personally pursues research mathematics. She is not a
programmer amd doesn't want to waste unnecessary time doing system
administration nor working with inflexible software. She believes that
octave, c++ and the best research software is supported by unix. As a unix
dialect she wants linux.

[Lisa] Lisa is shopping for a new computer to replace her aging host. Her
computer will be preloaded with RedHat 6.2 linux. Lisa is a professional
programmer, who plans to run a server and firewall on her old computer. Lisa
wants a low maintenance machine that reliability does her bidding.
Occasionally she needs to read and write files for Macintosh and/or Windows
users. She plans to remove Windows 95 from her old computer and run a
dedicated server and firewall under linux. In accordance with her Microsoft
End User License Agreement she will transfer Windows 95 to her new computer.
Since she plans to spend most of her time in linux, it isn't worth buying a
second Windows license to run Windows on both hosts.

[Oscar] Oscar is a system administrator for a large corporation that uses
Windows NT and Irix workstations. One of the Windows NT workstations has just
crashed and won't boot. Oscar has to recover critical data from the host
which was not backed up. He needs tools to script searches and filter files.
Oscar wants to use the panolpy of unix commands to low-level examine the hard
disk in his search for the lost corporate assets. Last year Oscar configured
a "dual booter" but he no longer remembers the details.

[Tom] Tom is a graduate school teacher. Tom also teaches continuing education
at the local community house. Nancy is a friend of Tom and asked for his help
with her new computer. Tom is happy to oblige and this HOWTO is one of the
consequences.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.4. How to Use This HOWTO

This HOWTO is focused on a general step-by-step procedure. You should first
read which character among the intended audience that you most nearly match.
Follow along as Tom helps each characters configure their systems. Before
doing more than skimming, you should at least skim the critical concepts.
Some of the words used may be unfamiliar, obsolete, or applied differently,
so it is important to understand their usage in this HOWTO. Please write the
maintainer with your experience good or bad.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.5. Concepts

Understanding this HOWTO depends on understanding its use of the following
concepts.

  * Disk and Format
   
  * Partition and Filesystem
   
  * Operating System
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. Procedure

2.1. Reference

 1. [Nancy] [Tom] Backup your software and data
   
 2. [Tom] [Lisa] [Oscar] Compile a catalog of hardware component models and
    software versions.
   
 3. [Oscar] Attach new disks.
   
 4. [Nancy] [Tom] Compact the existing software and data.
   
 5. [Nancy] [Tom] [Lisa] Repartition the disk.
   
 6. [Nancy] [Tom] [Lisa] Format the new partitions.
   
 7. [Nancy] [Tom] [Lisa] Load the new operating systems.
   
 8. [Nancy] [Tom] [Lisa] Install the boot manager (uc).
   
 9. [Nancy] [Tom] [Lisa] [Oscar] Cross mount the devices.
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.1.1. Backup

[Nancy] Installing linux on Nancy system will involve repartitioning. Any
time you repartition a hard disk you run a significant risk of losing data on
the disk. More precisely repartitioning does not actually cause data loss,
but does tend to discover data that was lost piror.

[Tom] Tom warned Nancy that she should backup everything before starting.
Familiar with pluming repair, Tom knew that whey you shut off the water for
10min to replace a dripping faucet, you often find that the pipes in the
floor were rusted and leaking. Nancy knew nothiing of plumbing, but she had a
good book collection and had moved several times. She knew that bookshelves
often break when you move them.

Since Lisa is buying a new computer, she has nothing yet to backup. When
Oscar asked for the backups of the crashed computer he was met with the usual
blank expressions. His job is essentially ot make a backup of the otherwise
lost data.

This version of this HOWTO does not detail how to backup. If you wish to see
more information on backing up or if you wish to provide information please
contact the maintainer.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.2. Catalog

During installation, the size of disks, and other accurate specifications
will be necessary. Entry of slightly wrong values will result in subtle
problems that may not show up immediately but will often be chronic,
frustratingly difficult to diagnose, and maybe impossible to fix.

Windows and your linux distribution may not support the same hardware. You
should see the Hardware Compatibility HOWTO for a list of what is known to be
compatible or incompatible.

In general Windows is the more restrictive with exception of WinModems/
WinPrinters/.... Any hardware supported by Windows will usually be supported
by linux, though not necessarily included in your distribution. Much
hardware, especially the old and the cutting edge, may be supported by linux
but not by Windows. If not included in your distribution, you can usually
download linux drivers and or modules from the Internet.

Winmodems, Winprinters, Winscanners, etc. are not supportable under linux.
These devices are actually firmware that depend on proprietary Windows
software. In the United States it is illegal to sell a linux distribution
that supports these devices.

[Lisa] Lisa has dealt with software long enough to know the value of
specifications. Even before purchasing a computer, Lisa has already created a
log. For each computer being considered from each prospective vendor, Lisa
has a list of each component, its model and capabilities.

[Tom] Tom knows that one of the least expensive means to support reliability
in any complex system (computer, airplane, car, etc.) is by keeping accurate
maintenance records. Many (if not most) of the compatiblity problems reported
by Tom's students would be prevented if accurate records were kept and
consulted.

Tom usually recommends avoiding WinModems, etc. because their performance
limitations are too severe for most people..

[Oscar] Oscar's company keeps records on the hardware components of each
computer. Before trying to fix any problem, Oscar examines the log and often
finds that intractible problems becomre easily solved when you know the model
details.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.3. Attach

One of the useful features of linux is the wide range of diagnostic and
repair tools that it supports. The easy ability to write scripts also makes
it easy to write worms and do other recovery operations.

[Oscar] Oscar has easy access to a spare hard drive. He checked the Hardware
Compatibility HOWTO to select a hard drive model.

  * Oscar grounds himself with a wrist strap to avoid accidental
    electrostatic damage.
   
  * He opens the case according to the service manual.
   
  * He slides the disk into the secondary drive slot and attaches an IDE
    cable.
   
  * Oscar closes the case and ungrounds himself.
   

This version of this HOWTO does not detail how to attach new drives. If you
wish to see more information on attaching or if you wish to provide
information please contact the maintainer.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.4. Compact

Most new computers preloaded with Windows are delivered with a single FAT32
partition that occupies the entire disk. Before loading a second operating
system on a shared disk, it must be split into at least two partitions, since
Windows and some linux distributions will not tolerate another operating
system on the same partition.

[Tom] Software is normally stored distributed across the disk partition.
Before splitting a partition, all the data must be moved to the start of the
partition, so that when the partition is split, the old software and data
won't be lost. Tom warns Lisa, Nancy, and especially Oscar that compacting is
not reversible. If the partition is error-free, no active files will be lost,
but disconnected (deleted) files may be lost. If the partition has errors,
tools exist that can often (but not always) recover disconnected files before
compaction. After compacting , the disconnected files are probably
unrecoverable.

The fips included in tomsrtbt-1.6.335 is 0.9e and Tom has used it directly
with Windows 95. Windows98 requires fips-2.0 or later which (at press time)
was not included in the archived tomsrtbt distributions.

Nancy is unafamiliar with open source code and the Internet, so Tom offers to
create her fips disk.

 1. Download fips-2.0 and expand in the directory $FIPSROOT
   
    (This may require privelege depending on Tom's linux configuration)
   
    (The address will probably change by the time you read this.)
    +-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
    |bash> FIPSROOT=/opt/packages/fips-2.0                                                      |
    |bash> mkdir -p $FIPSROOT/original                                                          |
    |bash> cd $FIPSROOT/original                                                                |
    |bash> wget ftp://sunsite.icm.edu.pl/pub/Linux/sunsite.unc.edu/system/installl/fips-2.0.zip |
    |bash> cd $PIPSROOT                                                                         |
    |bash> unzip -d oritinal/fips-2.0.zip                                                       |
    |                                                                                           |
    +-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   
 2. Insert and mount the startup disk from Nancy.
   
    (This may require priveleges depending on Tom's linux configuration)
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |bash> mkdir -p /floppy                                         |
    |bash> mount -t vfat /dev/fd0 /floppy                           |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
 3. Follow the instructions for fips. At press time, this means copy 3 files
    to the startup disk.
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |bash> cp restorrb.exe fips.exe errors.txt /floppy              |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
 4. Unmoun the floppy and return it to Nancy.
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |bash> umount /floppy                                           |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   

[Nancy] Nancy's new machine was delivered preloaded with Windows 98 on a
single partition occupying the entire disk. The installation was already
compact, but Nancy used scandisk and defrag anyway just to be safe. When
splitting the partition with fips, it warns that the physical partition
length does not equal the logical partitin length. Tom explains that this is
expected since her disk has more than 1024 cylinders. Tom suggests that Nancy
record the current partition info in case it is needed to recover from a
disaster. Following Tom's suggestion, Nancy reduces the first partition to
approximately 30% of the total disk size.

 1. Create a statup disk and give it to Tom.
   
    [Start][Settings...\Control Panel] [[Add/Remove Programs] [Startup Disk]
    [Create Disk ...]
   
 2. Verify that the disk has no detectible errors.
   
    (There may still be hiddent errors.)
   
    [My Computer] {(C:\)} [Properties ...] [Tools] [Error-checking status\
    Check now ...] [Type of test\Thorough] [Start]
   
 3. Fis any errors reported.
   
 4. Defragment the disk to remove blank areas and deleted files.
   
    [My computer] {(C:\)} [Properties ...] [Tools] [Defragmentation status\
    Defragment now ...]
   
 5. Insert the fips startup disk from Tom and restart the computer.
   
    [Start] [Shutdown...] [Restart] [OK]
   
 6. When the computer reboots, split the partition.
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |A:\> fips                                                      |
    |Save current partition info: yes                               |
    |New partition start: 501                                       |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.1.5. Repartition

A normal linux installation requires at least two partitions. It usually
improves performance to more partitions. Most bioses support no more than 4
primary partitions.

[Tom] Tom recommends that the disk be divided into 4 partitions.

 1. ~33% Windows bootable
   
    Windows requires residency on the first primary partition
   
 2. ~33% linux bootable
   
    On most computers, bootable partitions must reside entirely below 1024
    cylinders.
   
 3. ~64M swap
   
    A filesystem optimized for memory caching improves performance.
   
 4. ~33% data
   
    The last partition may be used by either or both operating systems if is
    compartible.
   

The Windows bootable partition must be one of the filesystems supported by
Windows. Likewise the linux bootable partition must be one of the filesystems
supported by linux. The swap partition must have a filesystem supported by
the operating system that will use it. The last partition will be used for
data, and can have any filesystm.

At press time, the above division is safe for most computers.

Nancy is unfamiliar with open source and the Internet, so Tom lends her one
of his diagnostic disks with tomsrtbt..

tomsrtbt is a small distribution of linux on a single floppy disk that loads
into RAM. Since it does not occupy nor run on the hard disk it is superb for
situations where the hard disk will be modified (e.g. repartitioning).

Tom stresses that repartitioning is simple but must be done with meticulous
care, since everything else depends on it. Like ignoring a crack in the
foundation of a house, partition table errors may not become apparent for a
long time, when it will be difficult or impossible to correct.

[Nancy] Nancy will be using her system primarily with Windows, so Tom
recommends that her data partition use FAT32 From the compoent catalog that
Tom prepared for her computer, Nancy knows that her hard disk has 1661
cylinders.

 1. 0001-0501 Windows FAT32 bootable
   
 2. 0502-1002 linux ext2 bootable
   
 3. 1003-1011 linux swap
   
 4. 1012-1661 data FAT32
   

[Lisa] Lisa will be using her system primarily with linux, so her data
partition will use ext2 The data partition will then be unavailable to
Windows, but will be more easily used from linux. Lisa's hard disk has 787
cylinders.

 1. 0001-0262 Windows FAT32 bootable
   
 2. 0263-0525 linux ext2 bootable
   
 3. 0526-0779 linux swap
   
 4. 0780-0787 data ext2
   

[Nancy] Nancy uses the tomsrtbt disk provided by Tom and fdisk on it to edit
her partition table.

 1. Insert the tomsrtbt disk and restart the computer.
   
 2. Read the fdisk instructions and list of known partition types
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |bash> /bin/fdisk                                               |
    |fdisk> m                                                       |
    |fdisk> l                                                       |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
 3. Read and record the partition table
   
    (After fips, her disk has two partitions.)
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |fdisk> p                                                       |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
 4. Since her disk has more than 1024 cylinders, update the cylinder count
    known to fdisk with an advanced command
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |fdisk> x                                                       |
    |fdisk expert> c 1661                                           |
    |fdisk expert> r                                                |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
 5. Delete the 2nd partition which was created by fips.
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |fdisk> d                                                       |
    |... partition[1-2]? 2                                          |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
 6. Add the new 2nd partition for linux
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |fdisk> n                                                       |
    |... partition ...? 2                                           |
    |... extended ... primary ... type? p                           |
    |... start ...? 502                                             |
    |... end ...? 1002                                              |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
 7. Add the new 3rd partition for swap
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |fdisk> n                                                       |
    |... partition ...? 3                                           |
    |... extended ... primary ... type? p                           |
    |... start ...? 1003                                            |
    |... end ...? 1011                                              |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
 8. Add the new 4th partition for data
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |fdisk> n                                                       |
    |... partition ...? 4                                           |
    |... extended ... primary ... type? p                           |
    |... start ...? 1012                                            |
    |... end ...? 1661                                              |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
 9. Reprint the partition table and check carefully for errors.
   
    (delete and add the partitions if there are any errors)
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |fdisk> p                                                       |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
10. Set the type (filesystem to be used) on each partition.
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |fdisk> t                                                       |
    |... partition ...? 2                                           |
    |... type ...? 83                                               |
    |fdisk> t                                                       |
    |... partition ...? 3                                           |
    |... type ...? 82                                               |
    |fdisk> t                                                       |
    |... partition ...? 4                                           |
    |... type ...? 0c                                               |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
11. Record and repriint the partition table and check carefully for errors.
   
    If unsatisfied quit.
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |fdisk> q                                                       |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
12. If satisfied, write the partition table.
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |fdisk> w                                                       |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   

Nancy records the new partition table in her computer log.
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|Disk /dev/hda: 255 heads, 63 sectors, 1661 cylinders                       |
|Units = cylinders of 16085 * 512 bytes                                     |
|                                                                           |
|   Drive  Boot  Start  End   Blocks  Id  System                            |
|/dev/hda1 *        1   501   402451+ 0c  Win95 FAT32 (LBA)                 |
|/dev/hda2        502  1002   402482  83  Linux Native                      |
|/dev/hda3       1003  1011    72292  82  Linux Swap                        |
|/dev/hda4       1012  1661  5221125  83  Linux Native                      |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.6. Format

In order to use any hard disk effectively, it must be formatted. After
formating, whther successful or not, all the old data in that partition is
lost (the cost of recovery goes up 10-100x).

[Tom] Tom warns that Formatting is the only operation that is neither
idempotent nor reversible. The tool provided by the intended operating system
should be used to format the partitions intended for that partition. Use
format under Windows to format FAT32 partitions. Use

[Nancy] Nancy formats the data partition under Windows.

 1. Restart the computer in Windows
   
 2. Format the partition
   
    [[My Computer]] {(D:)} [Format ...] [Format type\Full] [Start] Nancy uses
    the tomsrtbt disk provided by Tom to format the linux and swap partitions
    under linux.
   
 3. Insert the tomsrtbt disk and restart
   
 4. Check for bad blocks and format the linux partition.
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |bash> mke2fs -c /dev/hda2                                      |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
 5. Check the filesystem
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |bash> e2fsck /dev/hda2                                         |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
 6. Check for bad blocks and make the swap file system
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |bash> mkswap -c /dev/hda3                                      |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   

[Lisa] (untested) Lisa formats only linux partitions using tomsrtbt in the
same manner as Nancy.

 1. Insert the tomsrtbt disk and restart
   
 2. Check for bad blocks and format the linux partition.
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |bash> mke2fs -c /dev/hda2                                      |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
 3. Check the filesystem
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |bash> e2fsck /dev/hda2                                         |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
 4. Check for bad blocks and make the swap file system
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |bash> mkswap -c /dev/hda3                                      |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
 5. Check for bad blocks and make the data partition
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |bash> mke2fs -c /dev/hda4                                      |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
 6. Check the filesystem
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |bash> e2fsck /dev/hda2                                         |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.1.7. Initial Program Load

Now is when the operating system(s) becomes a part ot the computer. All prior
steps laid the foundation. This is the first time when the detail and
accuracy of the catalog will be especially useful. Follow the installation
instructions provided with your distribution. This HOWTO does not detail how
to load the distribution because the distribution instructions will provide
the best instructions.

[Tom] Though linux is available at no cost, Tom recommends purchasing a
distribution with hardcopy instructions and support tools.. The price of a
good distribution is well worth it. In Tom's opinion, asking friends is the
best way to choose a linux distribution. A distribution that satisfies your
friends with similar interests will probably satisfy you.

Tom knows that Nancy got a newly released graphics card with which he has no
experience. He warns Nancy that the X configuration may not work. When she
calls him, he uses the expert options of yast which tell him that though her
card is not listed by manufacturer and model it used the mach64 X server. Now
familiar with yast, Nancy installs the mach64 x server and removes the svga X
server. Tom stays to talk Nancy through X installation. Nancy's monitor is
not named in the configuration list, but with the model known from the
catalog, a quick visit to the manufacturer's website provides the scan rate
limits.

Tom knows that the configurability of linux frightens many new users and so
he has often recommended RedHat to first-time users because of its commercial
technical support and default configuration settings. He lets Nancy know that
though she should try to consider each question before answering, she need
fear a mistake because she can reverse almost any configuration decision
later. Most packages managment tools offer to load and save configurations
files (e.g. /etc/linuxrc).

  * Keep a list of the configuration questions and each answer to them.
   
  * When in doubt, add a package to linux, and note that it was in doubt.
   
  * A month after installation, go back and remove any packages that you
    haven't used, and log the removal.
   
  * Expect to discover some linux configuration errors by loss.
   
  * Change the linux configuration when you find that it is different from
    your desires.
   
  * When in doubt, do not add a package to Windows.
   

Tom knows that some differences between Windows and linux force some
compromises.

  * Set the hardware clock to local time.
   
    Windows displays time, timestamps file operations, and synchronizes with
    the netowrk from the same clock.
   
    Linux uses separate clocks for each of these. On a linux only system, the
    hardware clock is usually set to UTC (Universal Time Coordinate), the
    network standard. The network and file operations clock are usually just
    views of the hardware clock by linux. For display, linux usually shifts
    the hardware clock according to the timezone and date.
   
    Since Windows supports only one clock, you must decide (unless you live
    in Greenwich England) whether to set the hardware clock to local time or
    UTC.
   
    If you use UTC, you will have to mentally convert the time displayed by
    Windows to local time.
   
    If you use local time, some network activity may become confused.
    International email problems are most commonly reported. Mail sent from
    Berlin at 1300 local time may be stored a second later in New York at
    1200 UTC where it awaits a channel to its San Francisco destination. To
    save space, the New York host may delete mail that could not be sent in a
    reasonable time of 30min. If the Berlin mail was unclear that ti was sent
    at 1300 Berlin time, or if the New York host is unwilling to do the
    conversion, the email may be lost as undliverable after 1 hour (1300 -
    1200).
   

[Nancy] Since Nancy is an accountant, Tom recommends that she use the SuSE
distribution. SuSE comes with the ApplixWare suite of office software. Nancy
has already read the installation chapters of the book that accompanied her
SuSE distribution. yast from SuSE lets her store her configuration choices in
a file which she includes in her computer log.

 1. Nancy makes sure she has the catalog (and Tom's phone number) handy.
   
 2. She inserts the SuSE CDROM and reboots the computer.
   
 3. She selects installation options (English, Color, ...)
   
 4. She examines the hardware detected for her system and confirms that it
    matches her own catalog.
   
    Both the hard disk and CD-RW were detected.
   
    Both the sound and graphics cards were detected.
   
    Both the PCI and USB buses were detected.
   
 5. Following the instructions from SuSE, she starts YaST, the system
    configuration tool.
   
 6. Already partitions, Nancy declines YaST's offer to repartition her disk.
   
 7. Already formatted by Windows, Nancy declines YaST's offer to format her
    Window's partitions.
   
 8. Though already formatted, Nancy accepts the offer to reformat her swap
    and linux partitions.
   
 9. Set the mount points for the partitions.
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |[CREATING FILESYSTEMS]                                         |
    |/dev/hda1     no    vfat /WinC Win95 FAT32                     |
    |/dev/hda2 ... check ext2 /     Linux                           |
    |/dev/hda4     no    vfat /WinD Win95 FAT32                     |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
10. Nancy now selects the packages she wants.
   
    Nancy includes the nonstandard packages that she knows she wants (e.g. CD
    writing).
   
    Nancy excludes the standard packages that she knows she doesn't want
    (e.g. tape drive support).
   
    Nancy selects packagas for her specific hardware (e.g. X server) using
    her catalog.
   
    She indicates that the hardware clock is set to local time.
   
    Nancy saves a copy of her configuration and puts in her log.
   

[Lisa] (This subsection of this HOWTO is not yet written.)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.8. Boot Manager Load

If you have two or more operating systems on a computer, you must have a
means of selecting which operating system is loaded.

[Tom] Before installing a boot manager, Tom recommends that Nancy and Lisa
make a boot disk (and master boot record backup). He also recommends that
each test their boot disks before installing the boot manager. This is done
so that the computer can be booted and the master boot record restored to the
hard disk if the boot manager installation fails

Because of its configurability and robustness, Tom recommends lilo to most
users.. Most linux distributions support multiple linux versions on the same
partition. This means that you can install and test an upgrade to the
operating system without the trouble of a lengthy reinstallation. When the
upgrade is satisfactory (or not) you can remove versions no longer useful.

[Nancy] During installation, SuSE offers to make a boot disk, and master boot
record backup, before installing lilo.

 1. Create a rescue floppy.
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |[CREATE A BOOT DISK?/YES]                                      |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   
 2. Nancy write-protects the disk and puts in her log.
   
 3. Nancy installs lilo
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
    |[LILO INSTALLATION ...]                                        |
    |Windows /dev/hda1                                              |
    |SuSE    /dev/hda2 /boot/vmlinuz                                |
    |                                                               |
    +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   

[Lisa] Windows installation overwrites the master boot record with one that
loads Windows. After installing Windows, Lisa must reinstall lilo. To make
this easier she uses loalin under Windows to load her existing linux and then
uses linus to configure and install lilo..
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.1.9. Mount

[Oscar] [Nancy] [Lisa] (This subsection of this HOWTO is not yet written.)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. Choices

3.1. Architecture

The following is a summary of the architecture choices that you should
consider. Your choice will probably depend most on your compuer expertise
level, value of existing data, and expected division of usage between Windows
and linux.


Table 1. Architecture
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
|Separate for  |Shared by     |Support       |Pros          |Cons           |
|linux and     |linux and     |              |              |               |
|Windows       |Windows       |              |              |               |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
|              |address space |Not Supported.|              |               |
|              |              |Windows must  |              |               |
|              |              |be the only   |              |               |
|              |              |operating     |              |               |
|              |              |system in its |              |               |
|              |              |partition.    |              |               |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
|address space |partition     |Not covered by|No need to    |linux is slow. |
|              |              |this HOWTO.   |disturb the   |               |
|              |              |VMWare under  |current       |               |
|              |              |Windows       |configuration.|               |
|              |              |              |Linux can be  |               |
|              |              |              |loaded on the |               |
|              |              |              |emulated      |               |
|              |              |              |system.       |               |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
|address space |partition     |Not covered by|No need to    |Windows is slow|
|              |              |this HOWTO.   |disturb the   |               |
|              |              |VMWare under  |current       |               |
|              |              |linux         |configuration.|               |
|              |              |              |(unverified)  |               |
|              |              |              |Windows can be|               |
|              |              |              |loaded on the |               |
|              |              |              |emulated      |               |
|              |              |              |system.       |               |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
|address space |partition     |Not covered by|No need to    |               |
|              |              |this HOWTO.   |disturb the   |               |
|              |              |DosLinux      |current       |               |
|              |              |              |configuration.|               |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
|address space |partition     |Not covered by|No need to    |               |
|              |              |this HOWTO.   |disturb the   |               |
|              |              |Armed         |current       |               |
|              |              |distribution  |configuration.|               |
|              |              |(unverified)  |              |               |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
|partition     |disk          |Windows       |Works with    |Requires more  |
|              |              |requires that |standard      |installation   |
|              |              |Windows reside|mail-order    |effort.        |
|              |              |in the first  |home computers|               |
|              |              |primary       |from the major|               |
|              |              |partition     |dealers.      |               |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
|disk          |host          |              |Minimizes risk|Normally       |
|              |              |              |to existing   |requires a     |
|              |              |              |system and    |second computer|
|              |              |              |data. Requires|and extra      |
|              |              |              |less          |disks.         |
|              |              |              |installation  |               |
|              |              |              |effort.       |               |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
|host          |network       |Not covered by|Minimizes     |Requires at    |
|              |              |this HOWTO.   |installation  |least two      |
|              |              |Classes,      |effort.       |computers      |
|              |              |books, and    |              |equipped with  |
|              |              |online help is|              |network        |
|              |              |readily       |              |interface      |
|              |              |available.    |              |cards. Data is |
|              |              |              |              |not directly   |
|              |              |              |              |available to   |
|              |              |              |              |the other      |
|              |              |              |              |operating      |
|              |              |              |              |system.        |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2. Filesystems

Your choice of filesystem is usually constrained by the hard disk
manufacturer, your choice of Windows version, and your choice of linux
distribution.


Table 2. Filesystems
+------------------+-----------------+------------------+------------------+
|Type              |Code             |Support           |Description       |
+------------------+-----------------+------------------+------------------+
|DOS6              |0x06             |Windows 95,       |IBM DOS default   |
|                  |                 |Windows 98,       |filesystem. Names |
|                  |                 |Windows NT, linux |limited to eight  |
|                  |                 |                  |characters + 3    |
|                  |                 |                  |character type    |
+------------------+-----------------+------------------+------------------+
|NTFS              |0x07             |Windows NT, linux |Windows NT default|
|                  |                 |read-only         |filesystem. Names |
|                  |                 |                  |have arbitrary    |
|                  |                 |                  |length. Names     |
|                  |                 |                  |cannot include    |
|                  |                 |                  |special characters|
+------------------+-----------------+------------------+------------------+
|FAT32 LBA         |0x0c             |Windows 95,       |Windows95/98      |
|                  |                 |Windows 98,       |default           |
|                  |                 |Windows NT, linux |filesystem. Names |
|                  |                 |                  |have arbitrary    |
|                  |                 |                  |length. Names     |
|                  |                 |                  |cannot inlcude    |
|                  |                 |                  |special characters|
+------------------+-----------------+------------------+------------------+
|swap              |0x82             |linux             |linex default     |
|                  |                 |                  |memory cache      |
|                  |                 |                  |filesystem        |
+------------------+-----------------+------------------+------------------+
|ext2              |0x83             |linux             |linux default     |
|                  |                 |                  |filesystem. Names |
|                  |                 |                  |have arbitrary    |
|                  |                 |                  |length. Names can |
|                  |                 |                  |contain arbitrary |
|                  |                 |                  |characters. Tends |
|                  |                 |                  |to suffer little  |
|                  |                 |                  |external          |
|                  |                 |                  |fragmentation.    |
|                  |                 |                  |Scales well over  |
|                  |                 |                  |several magnitudes|
|                  |                 |                  |of size. Runs     |
|                  |                 |                  |quickly on        |
|                  |                 |                  |semirandom access |
|                  |                 |                  |systems.          |
+------------------+-----------------+------------------+------------------+
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.3. Linux Distribution

Your choice of distribution will depend mostly on friends' recommendations,
your level of computer expertise, and easy availability of packages. Most
distributions will happily reside on the same disk, so there is no reason not
to try several distributions until you find the one that is best for you.


Table 3. Distributions
+--------------+--------------+-----------------+---------------------------+--------------+
|Distro        |Publisher     |Source           |Pros                       |Cons          |
+--------------+--------------+-----------------+---------------------------+--------------+
|RedHat        |Red Hat, Inc. |[http://         |Easy to install.           |Does not      |
|              |              |www.redhat.com/] |Home-user-friendly.        |tolerate      |
|              |              |http://          |Commercial support         |multiple      |
|              |              |www.redhat.com/  |available. Large number of |versions on   |
|              |              |                 |bundled packages. Tolerates|same          |
|              |              |                 |unbundled packages.        |partition.    |
+--------------+--------------+-----------------+---------------------------+--------------+
|Slackware     |Walnut Creek  |[http://         |Largest number of bundled  |Moderate      |
|              |CDROM         |www.slackware.org|packages.                  |computer      |
|              |              |/] http://       |Professional-user-friendly.|expertise     |
|              |              |www.slackware.org|Easiest software           |required.     |
|              |              |/                |development. New packages  |              |
|              |              |                 |most often appear here     |              |
|              |              |                 |first. Tolerates unbundled |              |
|              |              |                 |packages. Tolerates        |              |
|              |              |                 |multiple versions on same  |              |
|              |              |                 |partition.                 |              |
+--------------+--------------+-----------------+---------------------------+--------------+
|SuSE          |SuSE Gmbh     |[http://         |Easy to install.           |              |
|              |              |www.suse.com/]   |Business-user-friendly.    |              |
|              |              |http://          |Aimed at business users.   |              |
|              |              |www.suse.com/    |Commercial support         |              |
|              |              |                 |available. Tolerates       |              |
|              |              |                 |unbundled packages.        |              |
|              |              |                 |Tolerates multiple versions|              |
|              |              |                 |on same partition.         |              |
+--------------+--------------+-----------------+---------------------------+--------------+
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.4. Backup Tools

Table 4. Backup Tools
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
|Tool                    |Requirements            |Description             |
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
|Norton Ghost            |Windows 95/98/NT network|Easy to use. Makes and  |
|                        |drive                   |restores images of disks|
|                        |                        |or partitions. No       |
|                        |                        |selection or deselection|
|                        |                        |of files/directories. No|
|                        |                        |index generated.        |
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
|tob                     |linux tape drive        |Easy to use. Easy to    |
|                        |                        |configure. Selects or   |
|                        |                        |deselects files/        |
|                        |                        |directories to backup or|
|                        |                        |restore. Generates index|
|                        |                        |of backups searchable to|
|                        |                        |find archived files.    |
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
|yast (untested)         |backup tool             |Graphical interface for |
|                        |                        |system administration   |
|                        |                        |tools. Included with    |
|                        |                        |SuSE linux              |
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.5. Compaction Tools

Table 5. Compaction Tools
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
|Tool                    |Requirements            |Description             |
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
|fips                    |Windows95 (Included in  |Splits a FAT16 or FAT32 |
|                        |tomsrtbt-1.6.335)       |partition into two      |
|                        |                        |partitions without      |
|                        |                        |destroying data so that |
|                        |                        |the new partition can be|
|                        |                        |loaded with a different |
|                        |                        |operating system.       |
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
|fips                    |Windows98, Windows98    |Splits a FAT16 or FAT32 |
|                        |(requires at least      |partition into two      |
|                        |version 2.0), Run under |partitions without      |
|                        |Windows98               |destroying data so that |
|                        |                        |the new partition can be|
|                        |                        |loaded with a different |
|                        |                        |operating system.       |
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.6. Repartitioning Tools

Table 6. Repartitioning Tools
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
|Tool                    |Requirements            |Description             |
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
|fdisk                   |Included in             |Supports editting of a  |
|                        |tomsrtbt-1.6.335        |partition table.        |
|                        |                        |Two-tiered menu system. |
|                        |                        |The first level includes|
|                        |                        |read and normal         |
|                        |                        |operations. The second  |
|                        |                        |level lets you fix      |
|                        |                        |inconsistencies.        |
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
|fdisk                   |Included with Windows 95|Does not permit         |
|                        |and Windows 98          |creattion of partitios  |
|                        |                        |associated with         |
|                        |                        |filesystems not         |
|                        |                        |supported by Windows,   |
|                        |                        |nor selecting a bootable|
|                        |                        |partition other than the|
|                        |                        |first primary partition.|
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
|yast (untested)         |backup tool             |Graphical interface for |
|                        |                        |system administration   |
|                        |                        |tools. Included with    |
|                        |                        |SuSE linux              |
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.7. Formating Tools

Table 7. Formating Tools
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
|Tool                    |Requirements            |Description             |
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
|e2fsck                  |Included in             |Checks an ext2          |
|                        |tomsrtbt-1.6.335        |filesystem for errors   |
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
|format                  |Included with Windows 95|Creates a vfat          |
|                        |and Windows 98          |filesystem on a chosen  |
|                        |                        |partition               |
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
|mke2fs                  |Included in             |Creates an ext2         |
|                        |tomsrtbt-1.6.335        |filesystem on a chosen  |
|                        |                        |partition.              |
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
|mkswap                  |Included in             |Creates a swap          |
|                        |tomsrtbt-1.6.335        |filesystem on a chosen  |
|                        |                        |partition.              |
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.8. Boot Managers

Table 8. Boot Managers
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
|Tool                    |Requirements            |Description             |
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
|lilo                    |linux                   |Configures which        |
|                        |                        |operating system is     |
|                        |                        |booted. lilo itself if  |
|                        |                        |very robust and         |
|                        |                        |configurable. Some care |
|                        |                        |is required, since lilo |
|                        |                        |is usually used to      |
|                        |                        |overwrite the master    |
|                        |                        |boot record, lest one   |
|                        |                        |carelessly loose the    |
|                        |                        |ability to boot Windows |
|                        |                        |automatically.          |
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
|loadlin (uc)            |Windws 95 or 98         |Started from Windows in |
|                        |                        |dos mode. (Can be placed|
|                        |                        |as shortcut in Windows) |
|                        |                        |Replaces linux with     |
|                        |                        |Windows in memory. Since|
|                        |                        |loadlin does not        |
|                        |                        |overwrite the master    |
|                        |                        |boot record, a failed   |
|                        |                        |installation should not |
|                        |                        |be able to risk Windows.|
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. Actual Experiences - Adding linux to New Computer Preloaded with Windows
98

[Tom] Nancy is unfamiliar with keeping a log, so Tom prepared it for her as
he unboxed and assembled her new computer. tom also knows that it is far
easier to remove the computer case once and record all the model numbers,
chipsets, and model types than it is to later open the case to get a single
model number or to guess the information that will be later needed. During
the computer service life, only 10% of the numbers collected will ever be
used, but there is no easy way to predict which 10%.

[Nancy] The following is an extract from Nancy's log. Identidation numbers
have been changed and some irrelevant data has been removed. Most of the data
came from the invoice that accomapanied the computer and the specifications
[Start\Run...\] Open: c:\DELL\DOCS\EDOCS.EXE [OK] that were provided on the
computer.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.1. Configuration

A hardcopy of critical portions of this information, master disks, and backup
disks is kept in a white binder, located physically close to this host,
labelled Nancy System Administration Log.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.1.1. Hardware

Table 9. Hardware
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|Date                    |Bay or Slot              |Contents                |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Primary Hard Disk Bay    |Hard Disk               |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Secondary Hard Disk Bay  |empty                   |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Diskette Drive Bay       |Floppy Disk             |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Drive Cage Top 5.25" Bay |CD Writer               |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Drive Cage Bottom 5.25"  |empty                   |
|                        |Bay                      |                        |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Drive Cage Top 3.5" Bay  |empty                   |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Drive Cage Bottom 3.5"   |empty                   |
|                        |Bay                      |                        |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Dimm Socket Bank 0       |RAM                     |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Dimm Socket Bank 1       |empty                   |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Dirmm Socket Bank 2      |empty                   |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Primary EIDE Bus         |Hard Disk               |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Secondary EIDE Bus       |CD Writer               |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |ISA Expansion Slot       |empty                   |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |PCI Expansion Slot 1     |empty                   |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |PCI Expansion Slot 2     |Modem                   |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |PCI Expansion Slot 3     |empty                   |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |PCI Expansion Slot 4     |Sound                   |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |PCI Expansion Slot 5     |empty                   |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |AGP Port                 |Graphics                |
+------------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.1.2. Components

Table 10. Components
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|Date                    |Component               |Action                                                       |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Case                    |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||Tower                                                      ||
|                        |                        ||Mfr Dell                                                   ||
|                        |                        ||Model Dimension XPS Txxx                                   ||
|                        |                        ||M/N MMS                                                    ||
|                        |                        ||Mfr Date mmddyy                                            ||
|                        |                        ||P/N 01968D Rev A04                                         ||
|                        |                        ||S/N nnnaa                                                  ||
|                        |                        ||DP/N 000338D Rev A00                                       ||
|                        |                        ||DS/N xxxxx-xxx-xxxx                                        ||
|                        |                        ||FCC Class B                                                ||
|                        |                        |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Dell Dimension XPS Txxx |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |Reference and           ||Mfr Dell                                                   ||
|                        |Troubleshooting Guide   ||Model MMS                                                  ||
|                        |                        ||P/N 8868D Rev. A01                                         ||
|                        |                        |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Central Procssing Unit  |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||procssor: 0                                                ||
|                        |                        ||vendor_id: GenuineIntel                                    ||
|                        |                        ||cpu family: 6 (Pentium III)                                ||
|                        |                        ||model: 7                                                   ||
|                        |                        ||model name: 00/07                                          ||
|                        |                        ||stepping: 3                                                ||
|                        |                        ||cpu MHZ: 448.971025                                        ||
|                        |                        ||cache size: 512 KB                                         ||
|                        |                        ||fdiv_bug: no                                               ||
|                        |                        ||hlt_bug: no                                                ||
|                        |                        ||sep_fug: no                                                ||
|                        |                        ||f00f_bug: no                                               ||
|                        |                        ||coma_bug: no                                               ||
|                        |                        ||fpu: yes                                                   ||
|                        |                        ||fpu_exception: yes                                         ||
|                        |                        ||cpuid level: 2                                             ||
|                        |                        ||wp: yes                                                    ||
|                        |                        ||flags: fpu vme de pse tsc msr pae mce cx8 sep mtrr pge mca ||
|                        |                        ||cmov pat                                                   ||
|                        |                        ||bogomips: 447.28                                           ||
|                        |                        ||FCC Class B                                                ||
|                        |                        |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |System Battery          |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||CR2032 3.0V                                                ||
|                        |                        |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |System Board            |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||DP/N AA722396-109 Rev. A01                                 ||
|                        |                        ||S/N xxxxxxxx-xxxxx-xxx-xxxx                                ||
|                        |                        ||FCC Class B                                                ||
|                        |                        |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Hard Disk               |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||Primary Hard Disk Bay                                      ||
|                        |                        ||Primary EIDE Bus                                           ||
|                        |                        ||FCC Class B                                                ||
|                        |                        ||                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||Capacity 13.6 GB                                           ||
|                        |                        ||RPM 7200RPM                                                ||
|                        |                        ||LBA 26.712.000 SECTORS                                     ||
|                        |                        ||CYL 1661                                                   ||
|                        |                        ||                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||DeskStar                                                   ||
|                        |                        ||Mfr IBM Disk Storage Products KFT.                         ||
|                        |                        ||Model DPTA-371360 IDE/ATA                                  ||
|                        |                        ||MLC F42312                                                 ||
|                        |                        ||P/N 31L9151                                                ||
|                        |                        ||DP/N 0003570T-47710-9A2-31TJ                               ||
|                        |                        ||Rev A00                                                    ||
|                        |                        |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Floppy Disk             |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||Diskette Drive Bay                                         ||
|                        |                        ||FCC Class B                                                ||
|                        |                        ||                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||Mfr Sony                                                   ||
|                        |                        ||Model MPF920                                               ||
|                        |                        ||S/N xxxxxxxx                                               ||
|                        |                        ||DP/N 0003884D Rev A00                                      ||
|                        |                        ||DS/N xxxxx-xxx-xxxx                                        ||
|                        |                        |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |CD Writer               |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||Drive Cage Top "5.25" Bay                                  ||
|                        |                        ||Secondary EIDE Bus                                         ||
|                        |                        ||FCC Class B                                                ||
|                        |                        ||                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||Jumpers                                                    ||
|                        |                        || Reserved                                                  ||
|                        |                        || Reserved                                                  ||
|                        |                        || R Audio Out                                               ||
|                        |                        || Gnd                                                       ||
|                        |                        || Gnd                                                       ||
|                        |                        || L Audio Out                                               ||
|                        |                        || CSEL (closed)                                             ||
|                        |                        || SLAVE (open)                                              ||
|                        |                        || MASTER (open)                                             ||
|                        |                        || ATAPI Cable (40-pin keyed)                                ||
|                        |                        || Power Supply (IBM 4-pin)                                  ||
|                        |                        ||                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||CDR 4x                                                     ||
|                        |                        ||CDRW 4x                                                    ||
|                        |                        ||Read 24x                                                   ||
|                        |                        ||                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||Mfr Sony                                                   ||
|                        |                        ||Model CD-R/RW ATAPI                                        ||
|                        |                        ||M/N CRX100E                                                ||
|                        |                        ||S/N xxxxxx                                                 ||
|                        |                        ||DP/N 0002064P Rev A00                                      ||
|                        |                        ||DS/N xxxxx-xxx-xxxx                                        ||
|                        |                        |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |RAM                     |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||Dimm Socket Bank 0                                         ||
|                        |                        ||FCC Class B                                                ||
|                        |                        ||                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||16Mx 64 MB SDRAM                                           ||
|                        |                        ||Non-ECC                                                    ||
|                        |                        ||PC100-222-620                                              ||
|                        |                        ||168-pin                                                    ||
|                        |                        ||                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||Mfr Toshiba                                                ||
|                        |                        ||M/N THMY6416H1EG-A0                                        ||
|                        |                        ||S/N xxxxxx/xxxxxxx                                         ||
|                        |                        |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Modem                   |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||PCI Expansion Slot 2                                       ||
|                        |                        ||J8 -> Sound Telephone Audio Out                            ||
|                        |                        ||FCC Class B                                                ||
|                        |                        ||                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||56K                                                        ||
|                        |                        ||See CD 3Com U.S.Robotics                                   ||
|                        |                        ||Modem CD-ROM                                               ||
|                        |                        ||                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||USRobotics V.90/56K                                        ||
|                        |                        ||Model 0727                                                 ||
|                        |                        ||Mfr 3Com                                                   ||
|                        |                        ||Product 3CP3298-DEL                                        ||
|                        |                        ||SN xxxxxxxxxxxx                                            ||
|                        |                        ||DP/N 00046XVP Rev A00                                      ||
|                        |                        ||DS/N xxxxx-xxx-xxxx                                        ||
|                        |                        |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Sound                   |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||Montego II                                                 ||
|                        |                        ||PCI Expansion Slot 4                                       ||
|                        |                        ||CD IN -> CD Writer Audio Out                               ||
|                        |                        ||TAO -> Modem J8                                            ||
|                        |                        ||FCC Class B                                                ||
|                        |                        ||                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||Mfr Turtle Beach                                           ||
|                        |                        ||Model A3D 320V                                             ||
|                        |                        ||DP/N 0005931D Rev A00                                      ||
|                        |                        ||DS/N xxxxx-xxx-xxxx                                        ||
|                        |                        |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Graphics                |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||AGP Port                                                   ||
|                        |                        ||FCC Class B                                                ||
|                        |                        ||                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||Mfr ATI Technologies Inc                                   ||
|                        |                        ||P/N 1024980311010171                                       ||
|                        |                        ||S/N xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx.                            ||
|                        |                        ||DP/N 0000320D Rev A00                                      ||
|                        |                        ||DS/N xxxxx-xxx-xxxx                                        ||
|                        |                        |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Power Supply            |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||FCC Class B                                                ||
|                        |                        ||DP/N 0009228C Rev N02                                      ||
|                        |                        ||DS/N xxxxx-xxx-xxxx                                        ||
|                        |                        |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Monitor                 |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||FCC Class B                                                ||
|                        |                        ||                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||17" (15.3" visible)                                        ||
|                        |                        ||Color 1024x768                                             ||
|                        |                        ||See CD Displays by Dell                                    ||
|                        |                        ||Ultrascan P780 Color Monitor                               ||
|                        |                        ||                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||Mfr Dell Computer, Inc.                                    ||
|                        |                        ||Model UltraScan P780                                       ||
|                        |                        ||P/N 6271R                                                  ||
|                        |                        ||S/N xxxxxxxxxxx                                            ||
|                        |                        |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Speakers                |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||Right Analog Input -> Sound ((( )))                        ||
|                        |                        ||FCC Class B                                                ||
|                        |                        ||                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||Mfr Harmon/Kardon                                          ||
|                        |                        ||Right M/N HK195                                            ||
|                        |                        ||Right P/N 3862A201                                         ||
|                        |                        ||Right DP/N ZL001-98U Rev B                                 ||
|                        |                        ||Right DS/N xxxxx-xx                                        ||
|                        |                        ||Left M/N HK195                                             ||
|                        |                        ||Left DP/N ZL001-98URev B                                   ||
|                        |                        ||Left DS/N xx-xx                                            ||
|                        |                        ||Adapter M/N A41411C                                        ||
|                        |                        ||Adapter P/N HK195-01T                                      ||
|                        |                        ||Adapter Input 60Hz 22W                                     ||
|                        |                        ||Adapter Output 15VAC 1.1A                                  ||
|                        |                        |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Keyboard                |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||QuietKey                                                   ||
|                        |                        ||PS/2 Keyboard Connector                                    ||
|                        |                        ||FCC Class B                                                ||
|                        |                        ||                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||Mfr Dell                                                   ||
|                        |                        ||DP/N 0004939R Rev A00                                      ||
|                        |                        ||DS/N xxxxx-xxx-xxxx                                        ||
|                        |                        |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Mouse                   |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||MS IntelliMouse                                            ||
|                        |                        ||PS/2 Mouse Connector                                       ||
|                        |                        ||FCC Class B                                                ||
|                        |                        ||                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||Mfr Microsoft Inc.                                         ||
|                        |                        ||Model IntelliMouse 1.1A PS/2                               ||
|                        |                        ||S/N xxxxxxxxx                                              ||
|                        |                        ||DP/N 03235E Rev A00                                        ||
|                        |                        |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Microphone              |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||-> Sound Mic In                                            ||
|                        |                        ||FCC Class B                                                ||
|                        |                        |+-----------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.1.3. BIOS

Table 11. BIOS
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|Date                    |Component               |Action                   |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Setup Procedure         |Restart When Dell splash |
|                        |                        |screen appears, [del]    |
|                        |                        |Dell Dimension XPS T450  |
|                        |                        |Setup                    |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Main\BIOS Version       |A05                      |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Main\Processor Type     |Pentium(R) III           |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Main\processor Speed    |450 MHz                  |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Main\Cache RAM          |512KB                    |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Main\Service Tag        |zzzzz                    |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Main\System memory      |128 MB                   |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Main\L2 Cache ECC       |Auto                     |
|                        |Support                 |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Peripheral     |No                       |
|                        |Configuration\Plug &    |                         |
|                        |Play O/S                |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Peripheral     |No                       |
|                        |Configuration\Reset     |                         |
|                        |Configuration Data      |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Peripheral     |Auto                     |
|                        |Configuration\NumLock   |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Peripheral     |Auto                     |
|                        |Configuration\Serial    |                         |
|                        |Port A                  |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Peripheral     |Auto                     |
|                        |Configuration\Parallel  |                         |
|                        |Port                    |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Peripheral     |ECP                      |
|                        |Configuration\Mode      |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Peripheral     |Enabled                  |
|                        |Configuration\Legacy USB|                         |
|                        |Support                 |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\IDE            |Both                     |
|                        |Configuration\IDE       |                         |
|                        |Controller              |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\IDE            |IBM-DPTA-371360-(PM)     |
|                        |Configuration\Primary   |                         |
|                        |IDE Master              |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\IDE            |None                     |
|                        |Configuration\Primary   |                         |
|                        |IDE Slave               |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\IDE            |CD-RW CRX100E- (SM)      |
|                        |Configuration\Secondary |                         |
|                        |IDE Master              |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\IDE            |None                     |
|                        |Configuration\Secondary |                         |
|                        |IDE Slave               |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Diskette       |Enabled                  |
|                        |Options\Diskette        |                         |
|                        |Controller              |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Diskette       |1.44/1.25 MB 3.5"        |
|                        |Options\Diskette A      |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Diskette       |Space Available          |
|                        |Options\Diskette Write  |                         |
|                        |Protect                 |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\DMI Event      |Valid                    |
|                        |Logging\Event log       |                         |
|                        |validity                |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\DMI Event      |No unread events         |
|                        |Logging\View DMI event  |                         |
|                        |log                     |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\DMI Event      |No                       |
|                        |Logging\Clear all DMI   |                         |
|                        |event logs              |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\DMI Event      |Enabled                  |
|                        |Logging\DMI event       |                         |
|                        |logging                 |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\DMI Event      |No unread events         |
|                        |Logging\Mark DMI events |                         |
|                        |as read                 |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Video          |Disabled                 |
|                        |Configuration\ISA       |                         |
|                        |Palette Snooping        |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Video          |64MB                     |
|                        |Configuration\AGP       |                         |
|                        |Aperature Size          |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Video          |AGP                      |
|                        |Configuration\Default   |                         |
|                        |Primary Video Adapter   |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Resource       |Available                |
|                        |Configuration\C800-CBFF |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Recource       |Available                |
|                        |Configuration\CC00-CFFF |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Recource       |Available                |
|                        |Configuration\4000-43FF |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Recource       |Available                |
|                        |Configuration\4400-47FF |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Recource       |Available                |
|                        |Configuration\4800-4BFF |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Recource       |Available                |
|                        |Configuration\4C00-4FFF |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Recource       |Available                |
|                        |Configuration\IRQ 3     |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Recource       |Available                |
|                        |Configuration\IRQ 4     |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Recource       |Reserved                 |
|                        |Configuration\IRQ 5     |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Recource       |Available                |
|                        |Configuration\IRQ 7     |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Recource       |Available                |
|                        |Configuration\IRQ 10    |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Advanced\Recource       |Available                |
|                        |Configuration\IRQ 11    |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Power\Power Management  |Enabled                  |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Power\Inactivity Timer  |Off                      |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Power\Hard Drive        |Enabled                  |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Power\VESA Video Power  |Standby                  |
|                        |Down                    |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Boot\Boot-time          |Disabled                 |
|                        |Diagnostic Screen       |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Boot\QuickBoot Mode     |Disabled                 |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Boot\First Boot Device  |Removable Devices        |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Boot\Second Boot Device |Hard Disk                |
|                        |(obsolete)              |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Boot\Second Boot Device |ATAPI CD-ROM Driv        |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Boot\Third Boot Device  |ATAPI CD-ROM Driv        |
|                        |(obsolete)              |                         |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Boot\Third Boot Device  |Hard Disk                |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Boot\Fourth Boot Device |Network Drive            |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Boot\Hard Drive\1       |IBM-DPTA-371360-(PM)     |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Boot\Hard Drive\2       |Bootable Add-In Card     |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Boot\Removable Devices\1|Legacy Floppy Drive      |
+------------------------+------------------------+-------------------------+
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.1.4. Firmware

Table 12. Firmware
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
|Date                    |Component               |Action                                                            |
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Partition Table         |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||tomsrtbt-1.6.335 (linux-2.0.35)                                 ||
|                        |                        ||bash>/bin/fdisk                                                 ||
|                        |                        ||fdisk> p                                                        ||
|                        |                        || Disk /dev/hda: 255 heads, 63 sectors, 1024 cylinders           ||
|                        |                        || Units = cylinders of 16085 * 512 bytes                         ||
|                        |                        ||                                                                ||
|                        |                        || Drive     Boot Start   End    Blocks  Id  System               ||
|                        |                        || /dev/hda1  *       1  1662  13349983+ 0c  Win95 FAT32          ||
|                        |                        ||(LBA)                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||                                                                ||
|                        |                        ||Partition has different physical/logical endings                ||
|                        |                        ||phys = (1022, 254, 63)  logical = (1661, 254, 63)               ||
|                        |                        |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-22              |Partition Table         |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||Windows98 Startup Disk +fips.exe                                ||
|                        |                        ||A:\> fips                                                       ||
|                        |                        ||(Ignore warning about physical != logical length)               ||
|                        |                        ||Save current partition info: yes                                ||
|                        |                        ||(saved as rootboot.000)                                         ||
|                        |                        ||New partition start: 501                                        ||
|                        |                        ||                                                                ||
|                        |                        ||tomsrtbt-1.6.335 (linux-2.0.35)                                 ||
|                        |                        ||bash>/bin/fdisk -v                                              ||
|                        |                        ||fips Version 2.8                                                ||
|                        |                        ||bash>/bin/fdisk                                                 ||
|                        |                        ||fdisk> p                                                        ||
|                        |                        ||Disk /dev/hda: 255 heads, 63 sectors, 1661 cylinders            ||
|                        |                        ||Units = cylinders of 16085 * 512 bytes                          ||
|                        |                        ||                                                                ||
|                        |                        ||  Drive  Boot  Start  End    Blocks   Id  System                ||
|                        |                        ||/dev/hda1 *        1   501   402451+  0c  Win95 FAT32 (LBA)     ||
|                        |                        ||/dev/hda2        502  1002   402482   83  Linux Native          ||
|                        |                        ||/dev/hda3       1003  1011    72292   82  Linux Swap            ||
|                        |                        ||/dev/hda4       1012  1661  5221125   83  Linux Native          ||
|                        |                        |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Windows Operating System|+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||DESC KIT,DOC/DSK,W98,OSR1,ENG                                   ||
|                        |                        ||                                                                ||
|                        |                        ||Language English (United States)                                ||
|                        |                        ||Keyboard United States 101                                      ||
|                        |                        ||First and Middle Jo'an K.                                       ||
|                        |                        ||Last Name Meier                                                 ||
|                        |                        ||Country Code United States of America                           ||
|                        |                        ||Area Code 336                                                   ||
|                        |                        ||Access Code No                                                  ||
|                        |                        ||Touch Tone Yes                                                  ||
|                        |                        ||Time Zone (GMT-05:00) United States Eastern                     ||
|                        |                        ||Daylight Savings Time Automatic                                 ||
|                        |                        ||Mfr Microsoft                                                   ||
|                        |                        ||Model Windows98 2nd Ed                                          ||
|                        |                        ||Product Key G74XD-KMV7J-XJC3X-PYBG6-DHPP6                       ||
|                        |                        ||S/N xxxxxxxxxx                                                  ||
|                        |                        ||DP/N 08001T Rev. A00                                            ||
|                        |                        |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-11-03              |linux Operating System  |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||SuSE-6.2.0-2                                                    ||
|                        |                        ||                                                                ||
|                        |                        ||reboot CDROM1                                                   ||
|                        |                        ||linuxrc v0.91 (kernel 2.2.10)                                   ||
|                        |                        ||                                                                ||
|                        |                        ||linuxrc> ... language ... English                               ||
|                        |                        ||... display ...? Color display                                  ||
|                        |                        ||... keyboard ... English (US)                                   ||
|                        |                        ||Main menu                                                       ||
|                        |                        ||  System Information                                            ||
|                        |                        ||    Harddisks / CD-ROMS                                         ||
|                        |                        ||      (Hard Disk and CD-ROM found)                              ||
|                        |                        ||    Processor                                                   ||
|                        |                        ||      (no bugs)                                                 ||
|                        |                        ||  Start Installation / System                                   ||
|                        |                        ||    Start Installation                                          ||
|                        |                        ||      Source: CD-ROM                                            ||
|                        |                        ||                                                                ||
|                        |                        ||Yast v1. 01                                                     ||
|                        |                        || Install Linux from scratch                                     ||
|                        |                        ||  [SELECT SWAP PARTITION] /dev/hda3                             ||
|                        |                        ||   ... format ... yes                                           ||
|                        |                        ||  [PARTITION HARDDRIVES/Do not Partition]                       ||
|                        |                        ||  CREATING FILESYSTEMS:                                         ||
|                        |                        ||   /dev/hda1     no    vfat /WinC Win95 FAT32                   ||
|                        |                        ||   /dev/hda2 ... check ext2 /     Linux                         ||
|                        |                        ||   /dev/hda4     no    vfat /WinD Win95 FAT32                   ||
|                        |                        ||   Create/Change Configuration                                  ||
|                        |                        ||   Xserver = svga (otherwise unrecognized)                      ||
|                        |                        ||  [SELECT KERNEL/Standard (E)IDE Kernel]                        ||
|                        |                        |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-11-05              |Root password           |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||In sealed envelope in hardcopy log.                             ||
|                        |                        |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-11-05              |X11                     |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||XFree86-3.3.4                                                   ||
|                        |                        |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-11-05              |X11 mouse               |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||bash> yast                                                      ||
|                        |                        ||[System Administration/X86 Configuration/SaX]                   ||
|                        |                        || [Mouse]                                                        ||
|                        |                        ||  Vendor: Microsoft                                             ||
|                        |                        ||  Name: Intellimouse PS/2                                       ||
|                        |                        ||  Port: PS/2                                                    ||
|                        |                        ||  Buttons: 3                                                    ||
|                        |                        ||  [Expert]                                                      ||
|                        |                        ||   Protocol: IMPS/2                                             ||
|                        |                        ||   Device: /dev/psaux                                           ||
|                        |                        || [OK]                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||[Apply]                                                         ||
|                        |                        |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-11-05              |X11 keyboard            |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||bash> yast                                                      ||
|                        |                        ||[System Administration/X86 Configuration/SaX]                   ||
|                        |                        || [Keyboard]                                                     ||
|                        |                        ||  Model: Dell 101-key PC                                        ||
|                        |                        ||  Language: U.S. English                                        ||
|                        |                        ||[Apply]                                                         ||
|                        |                        |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-11-05              |X11 Graphics Card       |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||bash> yast                                                      ||
|                        |                        ||[System Administration/X86 Configuration/SaX]                   ||
|                        |                        || [Card]                                                         ||
|                        |                        ||  Vendor: ATI                                                   ||
|                        |                        ||  Model: XPERT98                                                ||
|                        |                        ||  [Expert]                                                      ||
|                        |                        ||   Server: XF86_mach64                                          ||
|                        |                        ||   Memory: 8192k                                                ||
|                        |                        ||   DAC: 207                                                     ||
|                        |                        ||[Apply]                                                         ||
|                        |                        |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-11-05              |X11                     |                                                                  |
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-11-05              |TimeZone                |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||EST5EDT                                                         ||
|                        |                        ||                                                                ||
|                        |                        ||Hardware Clock set to local time                                ||
|                        |                        |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-11-05              |Network                 |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||Hostname: xxxxxxx                                               ||
|                        |                        ||Domain: xxxx.xxx                                                ||
|                        |                        ||                                                                ||
|                        |                        ||No network card                                                 ||
|                        |                        ||[TCP IP CONFIGURATION/Loopback only                             ||
|                        |                        |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-11-05              |Mail                    |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||Modem will be used                                              ||
|                        |                        ||                                                                ||
|                        |                        ||[SENDMAIL CONFIGRUATION/... temporary connection ...]           ||
|                        |                        |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-11-05              |Boot Manager            |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||lilo                                                            ||
|                        |                        ||                                                                ||
|                        |                        ||Windows /dev/hda1                                               ||
|                        |                        ||SuSE /dev/hda2 /boot/vmlinuz                                    ||
|                        |                        |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Partition 1 Filesystem  |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||C:                                                              ||
|                        |                        ||FAT32                                                           ||
|                        |                        |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-11-02              |Partition 2 Filesystem  |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||omsrtbt-1.6.335 (linux-2.0.35)                                  ||
|                        |                        ||bash> /bin/mke2fs -c /dev/hda2                                  ||
|                        |                        ||bash> /bin/e2fsck /dev/hda2                                     ||
|                        |                        |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-11-02              |Partition 3 Filesystem  |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||tomsrtbt-1.6.335 (linux-2.0.35)                                 ||
|                        |                        ||bash> /bin/mkswap -c /dev/hda3                                  ||
|                        |                        |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
|1999-10-21              |Partition 4 Filesystem  |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
|                        |                        ||D:                                                              ||
|                        |                        ||FAT32                                                           ||
|                        |                        ||                                                                ||
|                        |                        ||[[My Computer]] {(D:)} [Format ...] [Format type\Full] [Start]  ||
|                        |                        ||                                                                ||
|                        |                        ||[Close]                                                         ||
|                        |                        ||                                                                ||
|                        |                        ||ScanDisk reported no errors in a thorough test.                 ||
|                        |                        |+----------------------------------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A. Appendix

A.1. Frequently Asked Questions

A.1.1. After running fips, why does Windows report that I still have only one
    partition?
A.1.2. Why does my tool report an error that physical length does not match
    the logical length of the partition?
A.1.3. How do I know what version of Windows I have?
A.1.4. How do I know what version of linux kernel I have?
A.1.5. How do I know what version of linux distribution I have?
A.1.6. If I make a mistake can I start over?
A.1.7. How large should my swap partition be?
A.1.8. Should I add package xxx?

A.1.1. After running fips, why does Windows report that I still have only one
partition?

Windows 98 does not recognize the effect of fips-0.9e. fips-2.0 has
successfully been used to split a Windows98 partition. According to an
unreliable source, Windows 98 reads partition data from the first 512 bytes
of the partition itself and considers this more reliable data than the
partition table.

A.1.2. Why does my tool report an error that physical length does not match
the logical length of the partition?

This means that the partition table is inconsistent, and may be inaccurate.
Modifying a disk with an inaccurate partition table usually requires an
expert to reduce the almost certain chance of data loss.

The severity of this message is dependent on the size of the disk. Due to
historical limitations, most (but not all) computer BIOSs only support disks
with less than 1024 cylinders. Booting the operating system depends on the
bios, therefore (on such systems), the entire operating system must fit
within this 1024 cylinders.. For the same historical reasons, the partition
table format only supports reporting disk sizes of 1024 or less cylinders.
Many disks today have more than 1024 physical cylinders but by convention the
partition table records exactly 1024 cylinders. The operating system still
needs to know where the actual partitions begin an end beyond the first 1024
cylinders and this is recorded in the partition table.

A large disk with more than 1024 cylinders will have a logical size (sum of
partition sizes) that exceeds 1024 and matches the actual size, though the
partition table reports a physical size of exactly 1024 cylinders. In the
case of a large disk, this message is essentially useless.

A.1.3. How do I know what version of Windows I have?

One or more of the following should tell you what version of Windows you
have.

  * C:\>ver
   
  * {My Compuer} [Properties] [General]
   
  * [Start] [Run...] Open: command [OK]
   
  * [Start\Run...] Open: ver [OK]
   
  * [Start\Run...] Open: cmd ver [OK]
   

A.1.4. How do I know what version of linux kernel I have?

bash> uname -a

A.1.5. How do I know what version of linux distribution I have?

The question may have no meaningful answer. Since unix dialects (e.g. linux)
use many interchangeable parts, it makes little difference to this HOWTO what
distribution you have. The applications loaded on most linux hosts varies
with time and the tastes of the owner, so that they seldom match any
distribution for more than a very brief period.

Most distributions are loosely classed by the package manager that they use.

  * pkgtool - slackware
   
  * rpm - RedHat
   

bash> uname -a

A.1.6. If I make a mistake can I start over?

In general, no. For this reason, meticuluous care is required, especially at
certain stages. Some of the operations are idempotent. An idempotent
operation is one which either fails and has no effect, or succeeds and has no
effect after its first success. Some of the operations are reversible. A
reversible operation has an inverse operation so that you can return things
to what they were and start over.

Formatting is especially dangerous because it is neither idempotent nor
reversible. If formatting succeeds, the original data is lost. If formatting
fails, the original data is probably lost (since indices are usually
destroyed early).


Table A-1. Distributions
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
|Operation     |Idempoten     |Reversible    |Inverse       |Caveat         |
|              |              |              |Operation     |               |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
|Backup        |Yes           |Yes           |Destroy the   |Try reading the|
|              |              |              |backup        |backup lest it |
|              |              |              |              |be corrupt     |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
|Catalog       |Yes           |Yes           |Destroy the   |Record too many|
|              |              |              |catalog       |details since  |
|              |              |              |              |only 1-10% will|
|              |              |              |              |ever be used,  |
|              |              |              |              |though it is   |
|              |              |              |              |hard to predict|
|              |              |              |              |which 1-10%.   |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
|Attach        |No            |Yes           |Disattach the |Use            |
|              |              |              |devices       |electrostatic  |
|              |              |              |              |protection and |
|              |              |              |              |personal safety|
|              |              |              |              |procedures lest|
|              |              |              |              |the delicate   |
|              |              |              |              |components or  |
|              |              |              |              |yuurself be    |
|              |              |              |              |damaged        |
|              |              |              |              |physically.    |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
|Compact       |Yes           |No            |              |Repair         |
|              |              |              |              |filesystem     |
|              |              |              |              |errors before  |
|              |              |              |              |compacting,    |
|              |              |              |              |since recovery |
|              |              |              |              |will probably  |
|              |              |              |              |be impossible  |
|              |              |              |              |after          |
|              |              |              |              |compacting.    |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
|Repartition   |Yes           |Yes           |Record the    |Carefully check|
|              |              |              |starting      |the            |
|              |              |              |table. Reenter|partitioning   |
|              |              |              |the recorded  |before using   |
|              |              |              |starting table|the computer,  |
|              |              |              |              |since          |
|              |              |              |              |applications   |
|              |              |              |              |will believe   |
|              |              |              |              |the partition  |
|              |              |              |              |table and may  |
|              |              |              |              |destroy files. |
|              |              |              |              |A small error  |
|              |              |              |              |in partition   |
|              |              |              |              |borders or     |
|              |              |              |              |lengths may    |
|              |              |              |              |cause          |
|              |              |              |              |infrequent disk|
|              |              |              |              |errors that are|
|              |              |              |              |not seen for   |
|              |              |              |              |months, but can|
|              |              |              |              |become very    |
|              |              |              |              |time-consuming.|
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
|Format        |No            |No            |              |All data in the|
|              |              |              |              |partition is   |
|              |              |              |              |destroyed so   |
|              |              |              |              |make sure that |
|              |              |              |              |there is no    |
|              |              |              |              |useful         |
|              |              |              |              |information in |
|              |              |              |              |the partition  |
|              |              |              |              |and/or that the|
|              |              |              |              |data is in a   |
|              |              |              |              |good backup.   |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
|Initial       |Yes           |Yes           |Format the    |Carefully      |
|Program Load  |              |              |partition     |record, test,  |
|              |              |              |              |and expect to  |
|              |              |              |              |change the     |
|              |              |              |              |configuration  |
|              |              |              |              |of linux as    |
|              |              |              |              |your           |
|              |              |              |              |understanding, |
|              |              |              |              |needs, and     |
|              |              |              |              |desires change.|
|              |              |              |              |As you use your|
|              |              |              |              |computer, you  |
|              |              |              |              |can expect to  |
|              |              |              |              |quickly find   |
|              |              |              |              |that you wish  |
|              |              |              |              |you'd made     |
|              |              |              |              |different      |
|              |              |              |              |configuration  |
|              |              |              |              |decisions. Most|
|              |              |              |              |linux          |
|              |              |              |              |distributions  |
|              |              |              |              |allow easy     |
|              |              |              |              |reconfiguration|
|              |              |              |              |of a running   |
|              |              |              |              |system.        |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
|Boot Manager  |Yes           |No            |              |Windows        |
|              |              |              |              |installation   |
|              |              |              |              |overwrites the |
|              |              |              |              |boot manager   |
|              |              |              |              |with one that  |
|              |              |              |              |loads Windows  |
|              |              |              |              |automatically. |
|              |              |              |              |If you isntall |
|              |              |              |              |Windows+linux, |
|              |              |              |              |you must       |
|              |              |              |              |installl       |
|              |              |              |              |Windows first. |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+
|Mount         |Yes           |Yes           |Unmount       |Care with      |
|              |              |              |              |permissions is |
|              |              |              |              |needed to      |
|              |              |              |              |prevent        |
|              |              |              |              |undesired use  |
|              |              |              |              |of the computer|
|              |              |              |              |(e.g. openning |
|              |              |              |              |your telephone |
|              |              |              |              |to anyone on   |
|              |              |              |              |your cable     |
|              |              |              |              |modem network  |
|              |              |              |              |may tend to    |
|              |              |              |              |increase your  |
|              |              |              |              |phone bills.). |
+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+---------------+

A.1.7. How large should my swap partition be?

Swap partition size (or even its existence) is a hotly debated issue beyond
the scope of this HOWTO. Many books on performanc tuning provide guidelines
on swap partition size and how to recognize a need to expand or shrink it. At
press time, the author recommends 64M as a safe size.

A.1.8. Should I add package xxx?

A reader of this HOWTO presumably wants to benefit from the strengths of both
Windows and linux, and suffer the shortcomings of neither.

Most linux distributions allow you to cleanly remove any package. unix
dialects support permissions so that each package gets a well defined share
of the computer and this share can be identified and taken back in its
entirety. unix dialects support symbolic links so that the package can appear
to be in a convenient place without actually occupying space from the
convenient place. The distributions that do not support easy removal are
usually tiny specialized distributions like tomsrtbt. The risk that an
unwanted package will plague your linux indefinitely is small since you can
remove it at any time.

Most Windows packages can never be uninstalled cleanly under Windows, as they
usually leave dll updates and registry entries. It is therefore important to
add packages only when you are sure that you need them, since your only way
of removing them may be to reinstall Windows and every package that you want.

Sharing a machine between Windows and linux, means that linux can aid clean
removal of packages from Windows. Since it only identifies but does not
predict, linux cannot insure clean removal. Since linux find resolves to the
second rather than Windows find to the day, it can much more accurately
identify what was changed.

 1. Record the date and time before you install a package to Windows.
   
 2. Install the package.
   
 3. Record the date and time after you install the package.
   
 4. Under linux, use touch to create a file timestamped at the start of
    installation.
   
 5. Under linux, use touch to create a file timestamped at the end of
    installation.
   
 6. Under linux, use find to identify every Windows file and folder that was
    altered during installation.
   
 7. Store the list of altered files and folders to identify what has to be
    removed or restored.
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
A.2. Caveats

There ar no caveats at press time. Please contact the maintainer with any
suggestions that you have.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A.3. Tips and Tricks

There ar no tips and tricks at press time. Please contact the maintainer with
any suggestions that you have.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A.4. Reference

A.4.1. Legend

Table A-2. Legend
+------------------------+------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|Symbol                  |Meaning                 |Example                                |
+------------------------+------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|[...]                   |Left-click a button     |[File/Close] appears in most X         |
|                        |                        |applications. [OK] appears in most     |
|                        |                        |Windows dialogs                        |
+------------------------+------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|[[...]]                 |Double-left click a     |[[My Computer]] displays the devices of|
|                        |button                  |a Windows systems                      |
+------------------------+------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|{...}                   |Right-click a button    |{My Computer\Properties} displays the  |
|                        |                        |configuration of a Windows system      |
+------------------------+------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|...\... (or) .../...    |Walk a hierarchy in a   |linux uses / to delimit elements in    |
|                        |menu or filesystem      |hierarchies. Windows uses \ to delimit |
|                        |                        |element in hierarchies.                |
+------------------------+------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|bash> ..                |Enter instructions into |bash> uname -a (returns linux kernel   |
|                        |a bash-style shell      |version information)                   |
+------------------------+------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|A:\> ... (or) C:\> ...  |Enter instruction into a|+-------------------------------------+|
|                        |dos shell               ||[Start\Run...] Open: command [OK]    ||
|                        |                        ||C:\> ver                             ||
|                        |                        ||(returns Windows version information)||
|                        |                        |+-------------------------------------+|
+------------------------+------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|<...>                   |replace with indicated  |Enter First Name: <your first name>    |
|                        |value                   |                                       |
+------------------------+------------------------+---------------------------------------+

Glossary

B

BIOS (BIOS)
    A bios (Basic Input/Output System) is a small operating system supplied
    with and usually encoded in the computer hardware. The bios is often
    little more than is needed to load and run the operating system normally
    used. Most BIOSs at press time reside in shadow ram which is
    electronically removed from the computer once the normal operating system
    is loaded and starts running.
   
Boot Manager
    See: Master Boot Record
   

D

Defragmenting
    See: Repartitioning
   
Disk
    A disk is a physical storage medium. A disk must be formatted before data
    on the disk is accessible. A municipal library building is a good model
    of a disk. The building itslf has a fixed volume and can therefore hold a
    fixed number of books. The largest number of books can be stored by
    simply dumping them inside the building, but the result would simply be a
    big trash pile and the books would not be available for use. In order to
    use the books, they are placed on bookshelves so they can be accessed.
    Placing the equivalent of bookshelves on the disk is called formatting
   
   
    Table 1. Distributions
    +--------------------------+--------------------------+
    |Component                 |Analog                    |
    +--------------------------+--------------------------+
    |disk                      |municipal library building|
    +--------------------------+--------------------------+
    |format                    |bookshelves               |
    +--------------------------+--------------------------+
   

F

Filesystems (MBR)
    See: Partition
   
Format (MBR)
    See: Disk
   
Formating
    Though beyond the scope of this HOWTO, low-level formatting refers to the
    phsyical division of the magnetic media into magnetic domains similar to
    applying the bias to magnetic tape.
   
    See Also: Disk.
   

M

Master Boot Record (MBR)
    Each bootable partition has firmware that runs in the bios. This firmware
    historically occupies the 446 bytes before the partition table. A simple
    master boot record simply copies the operating system from the media into
    memory and turns computer control over to the operating system.
   
    At power up, cold boot, or warm boot, the bios searches the computer
    storage media until it finds a master boot record which it then executes
    it. The search locations and order differ between different bioses. Often
    the search order is configuratble with firmware encoded in the computer
    hardware with the bios. The most common search order is floppy, cdrom,
    network, usb disk, scsi disk, ide disk.
   
    A more complex master boot record, called a boot manager, loads a program
    into memory that gives the user an opportunity to select which operating
    system to load.
   

O

Operating System (OS)
    An operating system is firmware that supports effective computter use. As
    an allocator, the operating system verifies that only one process at a
    time controls the cpu , disk, write access to a file, and other
    unshareable resources. As a toolkit, the operating system provides a set
    of software pieces for common functions (e.g. reading from a file,
    writing to the screen). As a virtual machine, the operating system makes
    the physical computer behave like another well-specified computer, so
    that software can be written once for the well-specified computer and
    then run on many physical computers with compatible operating systems. As
    an allocator, the operating system is like the staff that schedules the
    use of meeting rooms in the library. As a toolkit, the operating system
    is like the library staff that reshelves books or the library copier. As
    a virtual machine, the operating system is like one of the many libraries
    that endeaver to look like the U.S. Library of Congress with vertical
    bookshelves, a circular reference desk, and a lobby area with indices. A
    patron entering any such library finds the layout familiar, and one
    patron can give usable directions to a patron of a different library.
   
      + Allocator
       
      + Toolkit
       
      + Virtual Machine
       
   
   
    Table 2. Operating System
    +----------------+----------------+
    |Component       |Analog          |
    +----------------+----------------+
    |operating system|library staff   |
    +----------------+----------------+
   

P

Partition
    A disk is a physical portion of a disk. A filesystem is a map between
    addresses and files accessed on the disk. Most libraries are divided into
    floors or sections, such as Adult Fiction, Reference, and Juvenile
    Non-Fiction. Each section usually has its own card catalog and often
    different sections use different schemes. Adult Fiction is usually
    indexed by Author Name. Reference is usually indexed by Subject. There
    are even competing indexing schemes for the same section such as Dewey
    Decimal or Library of Congress.
   
   
    Table 3. Partition
    +--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
    |Component                       |Analog                          |
    +--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
    |partition                       |library building floor          |
    +--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
    |filesystem                      |indexing scheme and card catalog|
    +--------------------------------+--------------------------------+
   
Partition Table
    Every disk has a partition table stored in a standard location and in a
    standard format on the disk. The partition table describes where each
    partition begins and ends on the disk. The partition table also describes
    what filesystem is used in each partition. The partition table is like
    the wall map that usually appears at the entry to any library. This wall
    map tells where each section (e.g. Reference, Adult Fiction, Juvenile
    Non-fiction) is located and how the books are shelved (e.g. Title,
    Author, Dewey Decimal)
   
   
    Table 4. Partition Table
    +-----------------+-----------------+
    |Component        |Analog           |
    +-----------------+-----------------+
    |partition table  |library floor map|
    +-----------------+-----------------+
   

R

Repartitioning
    Before defragmenting, the index (I), active files (A) and deleted files
    (d) are distributed across the partition.
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
    |.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.          |
    ||I|I|d|A|d|d|d|d|d|d|d|d|A|A|d|d|d|d|d|d|A|A|A|d|d|A| | | | |          |
    |'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'          |
    |                                                                       |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
   
    After defragmenting, the index(I), and active files (A) are concentrated.
    Some deleted files (d) are lost. Some space formerly occupied by active
    files become lost (l).
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
    |.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.          |
    ||I|I|A|A|A|A|A|A|A|d|d|d|l|l|d|d|d|d|d|d|l|l|l|d|d|l| | | | |          |
    |'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'          |
    |                                                                       |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
   
    After splitting, no active data is lost, and a new partition appears that
    is not yet formatted.
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
    |.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.                                                  |
    ||I|I|A|A|A|A|A|A|A|d|                                                  |
    |+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.                              |
    ||d|d|l|l|d|d|d|d|d|d|l|l|l|d|d|l| | | | |                              |
    |'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'                              |
    |                                                                       |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
   
    After repartitioning, the new partition is further split.
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
    |.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.                                                  |
    ||I|I|A|A|A|A|A|A|A|d|                                                  |
    |+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+                                                  |
    ||d|d|l|l|d|d|d|d|d|d|                                                  |
    |+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+                                                  |
    ||l|l|l|d|d|l| | | | |                                                  |
    |'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'                                                  |
    |                                                                       |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
   
    After formatting, each formatted partition has an empty filesystem. (e.g.
    dos6 (I, A), ext2 (N, A), vfat (V, A)).
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
    |.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.                                                  |
    ||I|I|A|A|A|A|A|A|A|d|                                                  |
    |+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+                                                  |
    ||N| |N| | | | | | | |                                                  |
    |+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+                                                  |
    ||V|V|V| | | | | | | |                                                  |
    |'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'                                                  |
    |                                                                       |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
   

S

Splitting
    See: Repartitioning
   

W

Winmodem
    Winmodems are a class of devices including winprinters, winscanners.
    Winmodems are a subset of the class of devices that achieve low-cost by
    replacing hardware in their convential equivalents with firmware run by
    the host. The drawback of these devices is that their dependence on the
    host usually slows or prohibits other operations simultaneously on the
    host.
   
    By analogy low-cost headlights for an automobile might consist of a
    flashlight atop a battery tray that sits in the front passenger seat. To
    use the headlights, you must start the car, remove the battery from the
    car, and install the car battery in the flashlight tray. The headlight
    cost is reduced by the cost of the solenoid, dashboard switch, wiring,
    and fuses. If you use the headlights, the limitations mean that you can't
    carry a front passenger, you can't restart the car, you can't use the car
    radio, and the fuel guage reads empty.
   
    Winmodems are distinct from the slightly larger class of these low-cost
    devices by the fact that they use proprietary firmware included in the
    Windows operating system. In the United States, it is illegal to sell
    firmware to use this proprietary firmware without Microsoft consent. At
    press time, the price of Microsoft consent is only slightly less than the
    cost of a convential device.
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bibliography

DosLinux: Small linux distribution installed on an existing Dos system i.e.
msdos, pcdos, opendos, and win95/98., .


e2fsck: ext2 filesystem checker Included in tomsrtbt, .


fdisk: Partition table editor Included in most linux distributions (e.g.
tomsrtbt, Slackware), .

ftp://ftp.rge.com/pub/systems/linux/slackware/slakware/a14/util.tgz


fips: Partition Splitter, .

ftp://sunsite.icm.edu.pl/pub/Linux/sunsite.unc.edu/system/installl/


format: Windows Partition Fromatter Included in Windows 95/98/NT, Microsoft.


Ghost: Windows Partition Backup, Norton.

http://www.norton.com/sabu/ghost/


Hardware Compatibility HOWTO: compilation of linux support experience what
works, what doesn't, If the product manufacturer does not support linux, it
may be several months before user experience is reported, .

http://howto.linuxberg.com/LDP/HOWTO/Hardware-HOWTO.html


lilo: Simple text configuratble boot manager, .


mke2fs: ext2 filesystem creator Included in tomsrtbt, .


mkswap: swap filesystem creator Include in tomsrtbt, .


System Performance Tuning: , O'Reiley & Associates, Inc., 0-937175-60-9.

http://www.ora.com/catalog/spt/


tob: Unix Tape-Oriented Backup, .

http://metabab.unc.edu/pub/Linux/system/backup/


tomsrtbt: Tom's Root Boot Small Linux distribution that fits on a single
floppy disk t's useful as a root/boot/recovery disk, Toms Ochser.

http://www.tux.org/pub/distributions/tinylinux/tomsrtbt/


vmware: x86 emulation, VMware, Inc..

http://www.vmware.com/


yast: Yet another Setup Tool Suse System Configuration Tool, SuSE GmbH.

http://newton.ikp.physik.tu-darmstadt.de/doc/susehilf/pak_e/paket_yast.html
